International Gymnastics Federation

2017 CODE OF POINTS

MEN’S ARTISTIC GYMNASTICS

For men’s artistic gymnastics competitions at
World Championships
Olympic Games
Regional and Intercontinental Competitions
Events with international participants

In competitions for nations with lower level of gymnastics
development, as well as for Junior Competitions, modified
competition rules should be appropriately designed by continental
or regional technical authorities, as indicated by the age and level
of development (see the FIG Age Group Development Program)

The Code of Points is the property of the FIG. Translation and
copying are prohibited without prior written approval by FIG. In
case any statement contained herein is in conflict with the Technical Regulations, the Technical Regulations shall take precedence.
Where there is a difference among the languages, the English text
shall be considered correct.


Koichi Endo JPN
Tomomasa Makita JPN
Andrew Tombs GBR
Adrian Stoica ROU
Hardy Fink CAN
Steve Butcher USA
Adrian Stoica ROU
Alain Macchia FRA
Andrée Montreuil CAN
Jean Francois Blanquino FRA
Julio Marcos ESP
Julio Marcos ESP

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

President 	
1st Vice-president 	
2nd Vice-president 	
Member	
Member	
Member 	
Member 	
Athletes’ Representative	

Steve Butcher USA
Huang Liping CHN
Hiroyuki Tomita JPN
Yoon Soo Han KOR
Julio Marcos Felipe ESP
Holger Albrecht GER
Arturs Mickevics LAT
Jani Tanskanen FIN

Illustrations 	
	
Symbols 	
English version	

French version	

Spanish translation and text 	
Elaboration and layout 	

Koichi Endo JPN
Tomomasa Makita JPN
Andrew Tombs GBR
Adrian Stoica ROU
Hardy Fink CAN
Steve Butcher USA
Adrian Stoica ROU
Alain Macchia FRA
Andrée Montreuil CAN
Jean Francois Blanquino FRA
Julio Marcos ESP
Julio Marcos ESP

ABBREVIATIONS


Koichi Endo JPN
Tomomasa Makita JPN
Andrew Tombs GBR
Adrian Stoica ROU
Hardy Fink CAN
Steve Butcher USA
Adrian Stoica ROU
Alain Macchia FRA
Andrée Montreuil CAN
Jean Francois Blanquino FRA
Julio Marcos ESP
Julio Marcos ESP

MTC	 -	 Men’s Technical Committee
OG	 -	 Olympic Games
WC	 -	 World Championships
TR	 -	 Technical Regulations
COP	 -	 Code of Points
FX	 -	 Floor Exercise
PH	 -	 Pommel Horse
SR	 -	Rings
VT	 -	Vault
PB	 -	 Parallel Bars
HB	 -	 Horizontal Bar
DV	 -	 Difficulty Value(s) A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, etc...
CV	 -	 Connection Value
EG	 -	 Element Group Requirements

Steve Butcher USA
Huang Liping CHN
Hiroyuki Tomita JPN
Yoon Soo Han KOR
Julio Marcos Felipe ESP
Holger Albrecht GER
Arturs Mickevics LAT
Jani Tanskanen FIN

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PART I - REGULATIONS GOVERNING COMPETITION
PARTICIPANTS

Section 1 - Purpose
Section 2 - Regulations governing Gymnasts
Article 2.1 - Rights of Gymnasts 	
Article 2.2 - Responsibilities of the Gymnast	
Article 2.3 - Duties of the Gymnast	
Article 2.4 - Penalties
Article 2.5 - Gymnast Oath
Section 3 - Regulations for coaches
Article 3.1 - Rights of the Coaches
Article 3.2 - Responsibilities of the Coaches
Article 3.3 - Penalties
Article 3.4 - Inquiries
Article 3.5 - Coaches’ Oath
Section 4 - Regulations for Technical Committee
Article 4.1 - The President of the MTC
Article 4.2 - MTC Members
Section 5 - Regulations and structure of apparatus juries
Article 5.1 - Responsibilities
Article 5.2 - Rights
Article 5.3 - Composition of the Apparatus Jury
Article 5.4 - Functions of the Apparatus Jury
Article 5.5 - Functions of Timers, Line judges, and Secretaries

Article 5.6 - Seating Arrangements
Article 5.7 - Judges’ Oath
Article 5.8 - Naming of New elements

PART II - EVALUATION OF THE EXERCISES

Section 6 - Evaluation of the Competition Exercises
Article 6.1 - General Rules
Article 6.2 - Determination of the Final Score
Section 7 - Regulations governing the D Score
Article 7.1 - Difficulty
Article 7.2 - Element Groups and Dismount Requirements
Article 7.3 - Connection Points
Article 7.4 - Evaluation by the D Jury
Article 7.5 - Repetition
Article 7.6 - D jury evaluation table
Section 8 - Regulations governing the E Score
Article 8.1 - Description of exercise presentation
Article 8.2 - Calculation of E Jury deductions
Article 8.3 - Instructions for the gymnasts


Section 9 - Technical Directives
Article 9.1 - Evaluation by the E jury
Article 9.2 - Determination of execution and technical errors
Article 9.3 - Expectations for exercise construction
Article 9.4 - E jury deductions

PART III - Apparatus

PART IV - Appendices

Section 10 - Floor Exercise
Article 10.1 - Exercise description
Article 10.2 - Content and Construction
Article 10.3 - Specific Apparatus deductions
Article 10.4 - Table of Elements
Section 11 - Pommel Horse
Article 11.1 - Exercise description
Article 11.2 - Content and Construction
Article 11.3 - Specific Apparatus deductions
Article 11.4 - Table of Elements
Section 12 - Rings
Article 12.1 - Exercise description
Article 12.2 - Content and Construction
Article 12.3 - Specific Apparatus deductions
Article 12.4 - Table of Elements
Section 13 - Vault
Article 13.1 - Exercise description
Article 13.2 - Content and Construction
Article 13.3 - Specific Apparatus deductions
Article 13.4 - Table of Elements
Section 14 - Parallel Bars
Article 14.1 - Exercise description
Article 14.2 - Content and Construction
Article 14.3 - Specific Apparatus deductions
Article 14.4 - Table of Elements
Section 15 - Horizontal Bar
Article 15.1 - Exercise description
Article 15.2 - Content and Construction
Article 15.3 - Specific Apparatus deductions
Article 15.4 - Table of Elements

A. Additional Explanations and interpretations


PART I
Regulations Governing Competition Participants

Section 1
Purpose

Article 1
The primary purpose of the Code of Points is to:
1.	Provide an objective means of evaluating gymnastics exercises
at all levels of regional, national, and international competitions.
2.	Standardize the judging of the four phases of FIG official competitions: Qualification Team Finals, All Around and Apparatus
Finals.
3.	Assure the identification of the best gymnast in any competition.
4.	Guide coaches and gymnasts in the composition of competition
exercises.
5.	Provide information about the source of other technical information and regulations frequently needed at competitions by
judges, coaches, and gymnasts.

Section 2
Regulations governing gymnasts

Article 2.1 Rights of gymnasts
General
The gymnast is guaranteed the right to:
a)	Have their performance judged correctly, fairly, and in accordance with the stipulations of the Code of Points.
b)	Receive in writing the evaluation of the difficulty rating for a
submitted new vault or element within a reasonable time prior
to the start of the competition.
c)	Have their score publicly displayed immediately following his
performance or in accordance with the specific regulations
governing that competition.
d)	Repeat their entire exercise, if the exercise has been interrupted for reasons beyond his control or responsibility with
permission of the Superior Jury.
e)	Briefly leave the competition hall for personal reasons and that
such a request not be unreasonably denied with permission
from the Chair of the Superior Jury.

	 NOTE: The competition may not be delayed through his absence.
f)	Receive through their delegation leader the correct result
output, showing all his scores received in the competition.

Apparatus
The gymnast is guaranteed the right to:
a)	Have identical apparatus and mats in the training halls, warmup hall and on the competition podium that conforms to the
specifications and norms for FIG official competitions.
b)	Use of mandatory additional 10 cm soft mats on top of the existing basic landing mats (20 cm) for Vault and Horizontal Bar.
c)	Be assisted to the hanging position by a coach or gymnast for
the start of their exercise on Rings and Horizontal Bar.
d)	Have one spotter present at Rings and Horizontal Bar.
e)	Rest or recuperate in the allowable time following a fall from
the apparatus.
f)	 Confer with their coach during the allowable time available to
him following a fall from the apparatus and between the first
and second vaults.
g)	Request permission to raise the Horizontal Bar and/or Rings
to accommodate their height.
h)	Repeat the entire exercise (Rings or Horizontal Bar only)
without deduction at the end of the rotation with approval by
the D-jury, if the gymnast shows a significantly torn handguard
(grip) causing a fall or exercise interruption.
Warm-up
In Qualifying, All Around Final and Team Final·

-	 Each competing gymnast (including substitute of injured gymnast) is entitled to a touch warm-up period immediately prior to
the competition on the podium on all apparatus in accordance
with the Technical Regulations that govern that competition:
-	 30 sec. on all apparatus except Parallel Bar
-	 50 sec. on Parallel Bars, including bar preparation

NOTE:
-	 In Qualifying and Team Final the entire warm-up time belongs
to the team. The team must pay attention to the time elapsed
so that the last gymnast receives a warm-up.
-	 In mixed-groups the warm-up time belongs personally to the
gymnast. The order of warm up should be the same as the
order of competition.
-	 The end of the warm-up period is signaled by an audible signal.
If a gymnast is mentally and physically prepared to vault or is still
on the apparatus at that time, they may complete the element or
sequence started. Following the warm-up period or during the
“competition pause”, the apparatus may be prepared, but
not used.
-	 There will be a conspicuous signal from the D1 judge (at official FIG competitions, a green light) 30 seconds before their
exercise is expected to begin.

Article 2.2 Responsibilities of the gymnast
a)	To know the Code of Points and conduct himself accordingly.
b)	To submit, or have their coach submit, a written request at least
24 hours before podium training to the Chair of the Superior
Jury to assess the difficulty of a new element.
c)	To submit, or have their coach submit, a written request at least
24 hours before podium training to the Chair of the Superior
Jury to raise the Horizontal Bar and/or Rings; or to submit
such requests in accordance with the Technical Regulations
that govern that competition.

Article 2.3 Duties of the gymnast
General
a)	To present himself raising 1 or 2 arms and thereby acknowledge the D1 judge at the commencement of his exercise and to
acknowledge the same judge at the conclusion of his exercise.
b)	To begin the exercise within 30 seconds of the green light or
signal from D1 (on all apparatus).
c)	To remount within 30 seconds after a fall (the timing starts
when the gymnast is on his feet after the fall). In this time the
gymnast can recuperate, re - chalk, confer with his coach and
remount.
d)	To leave the podium immediately after the conclusion of their
exercise.
e)	To refrain from changing the height of any apparatus, unless
permission has been granted.
f)	 To refrain from speaking with active judges during the competition.
g)	To refrain from delaying the competition, remaining on the
podium for too long, remounting the podium on completion of
his exercise, and from otherwise abusing his rights or infringing
on those of any other participant.
h)	To refrain from any other undisciplined or abusive behavior
or infringing on those of any other participant (i.e. marking
the floor carpet with magnesium, damaging any apparatus
surface or parts during preparation for his exercise or removing
springs from the spring board. These violations will be treated
as apparatus related violations, and will be deducted as large
errors with 0.5 points).
i)	 To notify the Superior Jury, if a necessity arises to leave the
competition hall. The Competition may not be delayed through
his absence.
j)	 To leave the supplementary mats in position (for landing) during
the entire exercise.
k)	To participate in the respective Award Ceremony dressed in
competition attire according to FIG Protocol.

Competition Attire
a)	They must wear long gymnastics pants and socks on Pommel Horse, Rings, Parallel Bars, and Horizontal Bar. Long
gymnastics pants, socks and/or slippers that are black or the
darker shades of blue, brown or green are not permitted.
b)	They have the option of wearing short pants with or without
socks or long gymnastics pants with socks on Floor Exercise
and Vault.
c)	The wearing of a gymnastics singlet on all apparatus is compulsory.
d)	They have the option of wearing of gymnastic footwear and /
or socks.
e)	They must wear the bib number supplied by the organizing
committee.
f)	 They must wear a national identification or emblem on their
singlet in accordance with the most recent FIG Publicity Rules.
g)	They must wear only those logos, advertising and sponsorship
identifiers that are permitted in the most recent FIG Publicity
Rules.
h)	The competition attire must be identical for members from the
same federation in the Qualification and Team Final Competitions. In the Qualification individual gymnasts from the same
federation (without a team) may wear different competition
attire.
i)	 Handguards, body bandages, and wrist wraps are permitted;
they must be securely fastened, in good repair and should not
detract from the aesthetics of the performance. Skin-colored
bandages are recommended.

Articles 2.4 Penalties
a)	The normal penalty for a violation of the rules and expectations
presented in Article 2 and Article 3 are considered medium
errors of 0.30 points for behavioral violations and large errors
of 0.50 points for apparatus related violations.
b)	A few other possibilities for penalties also exist and these are
outlined below.
c)	Unless otherwise indicated these penalties are always applied
by the D1 judge to the Final Score for that exercise.
d)	In extreme cases, the gymnast or coach may be expelled
from the competition hall in addition to suffering the specified
penalty.
e)	Violations and the associated penalties are:

Violation

Penalty

Behaviour Related Violations

Not acknowledging the D1 judge
before or after the exercise.

0.30 for each time from the Final
Score by the D1 judge.

Exceeding 30 sec. before commencing exercise.

0.30 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.

Exceeding 60 sec. before commencing exercise.

Exercise is terminated.

Exceeding 30 sec. before continuing after a fall.

0.30 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.

Exceeding 60 sec. before continuing after a fall.

Exercise is terminated at the fall

Remounting podium after the exercise.

0.30 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.

Coach speaking with gymnast during the exercise.

0.30 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.

Other undisciplined or abusive behaviour.

0.30 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.

0.30 from the Final Score (once for
a competition session) Applied by
the Chair of the Superior Jury.

Apparatus Related Violations

Non-permitted presence of spotter.

0.50 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.

Incorrect use of magnesium and/or
damaging apparatus.

0.50 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.

0.50 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.

Coach moving supplementary mats
during the exercise.

0.50 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.

Changing the height of the apparatus without permission.

0.50 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.

Re-arrangement or removal
springs from the springboard.

0.50 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.

Illegal use of supplementary mats
or non-use where required.

of

Other Individual Violations

Absent from the competition area
without permission failure to return
and complete the competition.

Absent from Victory Ceremony.

Disqualification from remainder of
competition (By the Chair of the
Superior Jury).
Result and Final Score is annulled
for team and individual purposes
(By Superior Jury).

Performing without signal or green
light.

Final Score = 0 points.

Team Violations

Team gymnast(s) compete in wrong
order on an apparatus.

1,0 from the Total Team Score on
the applicable apparatus (By Chair
of the Superior Jury).

Violations of attire regulations that
apply to Team Competition.

1,0 from the Total Team Score,
once per competition, applied by
the Chair of the Superior Jury.

Article 2.5 Gymnasts’ Oath 
“In the name of all gymnasts, I promise that we shall take part in this
World Championships (or any other official FIG Event) respecting
and abiding by the rules which govern them, committing ourselves
to a sport without doping and without drugs, in the true spirit of
sportsmanship, for the glory of sport and the honour of the gymnasts.”

Section 3
Regulations for coaches

Article 3.1 Rights of the Coaches
The coach is guaranteed the right to:
a)	Assist the gymnast or team under his care in submitting written
requests related to the raising of apparatus and the rating of
a new vault or element.
b)	Assist the gymnast or team under their care on the podium
during the warm up period on all apparatus.
c)	Help the gymnast or team prepare the apparatus for competition. Preparation of any apparatus may be performed by
coaches for the upcoming rotation upon completion of the
final exercise in the current rotation and publication of the last
gymnast’s score.
d)	Lift the gymnast to a hanging position on the Rings and Horizontal Bar.
e)	Be present on the podium after the green light is lit to remove
the springboard on - Parallel Bars.
f)	 Be present at Rings and Horizontal Bar during the gymnast’s
exercise for reasons of safety.
g)	Assist or advise the gymnast during the thirty seconds after a
fall on all apparatus and between the first and second vault.
h)	Have their gymnast’s score publicly displayed immediately
following their performance or in accordance with the specific
regulations governing that competition.
i)	 Be present at all apparatus to help in case of injuries or defects
of the apparatus.
j)	Inquire to Superior Jury concerning the evaluation of the
content of the exercise of the gymnast (see Art. 3.4).
k)	Request to Superior Jury a review of the Time and Line deductions.

Article 3.2 Responsibilities of the Coaches to:
a)	Know the Code of Points and conduct himself accordingly.
b)	Submit the competition order and other information required in
accordance with the Code of Points and/or the FIG Technical
Regulations that govern that competition.
c)	Refrain from changing the height of any apparatus or adding,
rearranging or removing springs from the springboard.
d)	Refrain from delaying the competition, obstructing the view of
the judges and from otherwise abusing or interfering with the
rights of any other participant.
e)	Refrain from speaking to the gymnast or from assisting in any
other way (give signals, shouts, cheers or similar) during his
performance.
f)	 Refrain from engaging in discussions with active judges and/
or other persons outside of the inner arena circle during the
competition (exception: team doctor, delegation leader).
g)	Refrain from any other undisciplined or abusive behavior.
h)	Conduct themselves in a fair and sportsmanlike manner at all
times during the competition.
i)	 Participate in a sportsmanlike manner in any applicable Award
Ceremony.

NOTE: See Deductions for Violations and Unsportsmanlike Behavior.

Number of Coaches Permitted in the Inner Circle:

Qualifying and Team Final Competitions
- Complete teams
- Nations with individuals

1 or 2 coaches
1 coach

All - Around Competition and Apparatus Finals
Competition for
- Each gymnast

1 coach

Article 3.3 Penalties
Behavior of coach

By Chair of Superior Jury (In
Consultation with Superior Jury)

For FIG Official and Registered
Competitions

Behavior of Coach with no direct impact on the result/performance
of the gymnast/team
Unsportsmanlike conduct (valid for
all phases of the competition).

1st time –Yellow card for coach
(warning).
2nd time –Red card for coach and
removal of coach from the competition.*

Other flagrant, undisciplined and
abusive behaviour (valid for all
phases of the competition).

Immediate Red card for coach and
removal of coach from the competition.*

Behaviour of Coach with direct impact on the result/performance of
the gymnast/team
Unsportsmanlike conduct, i.e. unexcused delay or interruption of
competition, speaking to active
judges during the competition except to D1 - Judge (inquiry only
permitted), speaking directly to the
gymnast, by giving signals, shouts
(cheers) or similar during the exercise, etc.

1st time – 0.50 (from gymnast/team
at event) and Yellow card for coach
(warning) if coach speaks to active
judges.
1st time – 1.00 (from gymnast/team
at event) and Yellow card for coach
(warning) if coach speaks aggressively to active judges.

2nd time – 1.00 (from gymnast/team
at event), Red card for coach and
removal of coach from the competition floor.*
Other flagrant, undisciplined and
abusive behaviour, i.e. incorrect
presence of unauthorized persons
in inner circle during competition,
etc.

– 1.00 (from gymnast/team at
event), immediate Red card for
coach and removal of coach from
the competition floor.*

Note: If one of two coaches from a team is dismissed from the competition inner circle, it is possible to replace that coach with another
coach one time during the entire competition.
1st offense = yellow card.
2nd offense = red card, at which time the coach is excluded from
the rest of the competition phases.
*if there is only one coach, then the coach would remain in the
competition but would not be eligible for accreditation at the
next World Championships, Olympic Games.

Article 3.4 Inquiries
Please refer to TR (Technical Regulations).

Article 3.5 Coaches’ Oath
“In the name of all Coaches and other members of the athlete’s
entourage, I promise that we shall commit ourselves to ensuring
that the spirit of sportsmanship and ethics is fully adhered to and
upheld in accordance with the fundamental principles of Olympism.
We shall commit ourselves to educating the gymnasts to adhere to
fair play and drug free sport and to respect all FIG Rules governing
the World Championships.”

Section 4
Regulations for the Technical Committee

Article 4.1 The President of the MTC
The President of the Men’s Technical Committee or his representative will serve as Chair of the Superior Jury. Their responsibilities
and those of the Superior Jury include:
a)	The overall Technical Direction of the competition as outlined
in the Technical Regulations.
b)	To call and chair all judges’ meetings and instruction sessions.
c)	To apply the stipulations of the Judges’ Regulations applying
to that competition.
d)	To deal with requests for evaluation of new elements, raising
the Horizontal Bar and/or Rings, leaving the competition area,
and other issues that may arise. Such decisions are normally
made by the Men’s Technical Committee.
e)	To make sure that the time schedule published in the Work
plan is respected.
f)	 To control the work of the Apparatus Supervisors and intervene
if deemed necessary. Except in case of an inquiry, time or line
errors, generally no change of score is allowed after the score
has been flashed on the score board.
g)	To deal with inquiries as outlined herein.
h)	In cooperation with the members of the Superior Jury, to issue
warnings to or replace any person acting in any judging capacity who is considered to be unsatisfactory or to have broken
their oath.
i)	 To conduct a global video analysis (post competition) with the
TC to determine errors in judgment and to submit the results
of the Judges evaluation to the FIG Disciplinary Commission.
j)	To supervise the checking of the apparatus measurement
specifications according to the FIG Apparatus Norms.
k)	In unusual or special circumstances may nominate a judge to
the competition.
l)	 To submit a report to the FIG Executive Committee, which must
be sent to the FIG Secretary General as soon as possible,
but no later than 30 days after the event, which contains the
following:
·	 General remarks about the competition including special
occurrences and conclusions for the future.
·	 Detailed analyses of the judges’ performance including
proposals for rewarding the best judges and sanctions
against the judges who fail to meet expectations within 3
months.
·	 Detailed list of all interventions (score changes before
and after publication).
·	 Technical analyses of the D-judges’ scores.

Article 4.2 The MTC Members
During each phase of the competition, the members of the Men’s
Technical Committee or their representatives will serve as members
of the Superior Jury and Apparatus Supervisors for each apparatus.
Their responsibilities include:
a)	To participate in the direction of the judges’ meetings and
instruction sessions and guide the judges to perform the correct work on their respective apparatus.
b)	To apply the Judges’ Regulations control with fairness, consistency and completely in accordance with the currently valid
regulations and criteria.
c)	To record the entire exercise content in symbol notation.
d)	To calculate the D and E Score (control scores) for the purpose
of evaluation of the D, R and E Panels.
e)	To control the total evaluation and the final score for each exercise.
f)	 To assure that the gymnast is given the correct score for their
performance or intervene as ruled herein.

Section 5
Regulations and Structure of apparatus Juries

Article 5.1 Responsibilities
Every judge is fully and solely responsible for their own scores.
All members of the Apparatus Juries have the responsibility to:
a)	Have thorough knowledge of:
-	 the FIG Technical Regulations,
-	 the Code of Points,
-	 the FIG Judges’ Rules,
-	 any other technical information necessary to carry out
their duties during a competition.
b)	Be in possession of the international Judge’s Brevet valid for
the current Cycle and produce the Judge’s Log Book.
c)	Possess the Category necessary for the level of competition
they are judging.
d)	Have extensive knowledge in contemporary gymnastics and to
understand the intent, purpose, interpretation, and application
of each rule.
e)	Attend all scheduled instruction sessions and meetings of
judges before the respective Competition (extraordinary
exceptions, which were unavoidable, will actually be decided
by the FIG MTC).
f)	 Adhere to any special organizational or judging related instruction given by the governing authorities (i.e. Scoring system
instructions).
g)	To check the apparatus used at training, warm-up and competition with the FIG Apparatus Norms.

g)	Participation in podium training is mandatory for all judges.
h)	Be prepared thoroughly on all apparatus
i)	 Be capable of fulfilling the various necessary mechanical duties, which include:
-	 Correctly completing any required score sheets.
-	 Using any necessary computer or mechanical equipment.
-	 Facilitating the efficient running of the competition.
-	 Communicating effectively with other judges
j)	 Be well prepared, rested, vigilant, and punctually present at
least one hour before the start of competition or according to
the instructions from the Work plan.
k)	Wear the FIG prescribed competition uniform (dark blue jacket,
grey trousers, light coloured shirt with tie), except at the OG,
where the uniform is supplied by the Organizing Committee.

During the competition judges must:
a)	Behave at all times in a professional manner and exemplify
non-partisan ethical behavior.
b)	Fulfill the functions outlined as specified in Article 5.4
c)	Evaluate each exercise accurately, consistently, quickly, objectively and fairly; when in doubt, give the benefit of that doubt
to the gymnast.
d)	Maintain a record of their personal scores.
e)	Remain in own assigned seat (except with the consent of D1
Judge) and refrain from having contact or discussions with
gymnasts, coaches, delegation leaders or other judges.

	 Penalties for inappropriate evaluation and behavior by judges will
be in accordance with the current version of the FIG Judges’ Rules
and/or the TR that apply to that competition.

Article 5.2 Rights
	 In case of an intervention by the Superior Jury, the Judge has the
right to explain their score and to agree (or not) to a change. In
case of disagreement the Judge may be overruled by the Superior
Jury and shall be informed accordingly.

	 In case of arbitrary action taken against a judge, they have the
right to file an appeal:
a)	to the Superior Jury, if the action was initiated by the Apparatus
Supervisor or
b)	to the Jury of Appeal, if the action was initiated by the Superior Jury.

Article 5.3 Composition of the Apparatus Jury
The Apparatus Jury (Judges’ Panels)
	 For the official FIG Competitions, World Championships and
Olympic Games, the Apparatus Jury will consist of a D-Panel and
an E-Panel.
-	 The D Judges are drawn and appointed by the FIG Technical
Committee in accordance with the most current FIG Technical
Regulations
-	 E- Judging Panels and supplementary positions will be drawn
under the authority of the TC in accordance with the current
Technical Regulations or Judges’ Rules that govern that competition.
-	 R-Judges are appointed by the FIG Presidential commission.
	 The structure of the Apparatus Jury for the various types of competitions should be as follows:
WC and OG

International Invitational

9 Judge Panel
Minimum 6 Judge Panel
2 D - Panel Judges
2 D - Panel Judges
5 E - Panel Judges
4 E - Panel Judges
2 R - Panel Judges
(Recommended)
				
Line and Time judges:
-	 2 line judges for Floor Exercise,
-	 1 line judge for Vault,
-	 1 time keeper for Floor Exercise,
-	 1 time keeper Parallel Bars warm up time.
	 Modifications to the Judges’ Panels are possible for other international competitions and for national and local competitions.

Article 5.4 Function of the Apparatus Jury

Article 5.4.1 Functions of the D - Panel
a)	D- Panel Judges record the entire exercise content in symbol
notation, evaluate independently, without bias and then jointly
determine the D score content. Discussion is allowed.
b)	The D-Panel enters the D- score into the computer.
c)	The D-score content includes:
-	 The value of elements (difficulty value) according to the
table of elements.
-	 The connections value, based on special rules for each
apparatus.
-	 The number and the value of Element Group Requirements executed.
Function of The D1 judge:
a)	To serve as liaison between the Apparatus Jury and the Apparatus Supervisor. The Apparatus Supervisor will then consult
when necessary with the Superior Jury.
b)	To coordinate the work of the Time Judges, Line Judges and
Secretaries.
c)	To ensure the efficient running of the apparatus including the
control of warm up time.
d)	To display the green light or other conspicuous signal to notify the gymnasts they must begin their exercise within thirty
seconds.
e)	To ensure that neutral deductions for time, line, behavior faults
are taken from the Final Score before being flashed.
f)	 To ensure the correct penalties for a short exercise are applied.
g)	To ensure the following deductions are applied for:
-	 Failure to present before and after the exercise.
-	 Performance of an invalid “0” vault.
-	 Assistance during the: Vault, Exercise and Dismounts.
Function the D- Panel After the Competition:
	 Will submit a written competition report, as directed by the TC
President with the following information:
-	 Forms listing violations, ambiguities and questionable decisions with the number and name of the gymnast.

-	 The content of all exercises to the President of the Men’s
Technical Committee and the Apparatus Supervisor in the
Superior Jury in one of the official FIG languages within 2
months of the competition.

Article 5.4.2 Functions of the E - Panel
a)	They must observe the exercises attentively, evaluate the
faults and apply the corresponding deductions correctly, independently and without consulting the other judges.
b)	They must record the deductions for:
-	 General Faults.
-	 Technical compositional errors.
-	 Positional Errors.
c)	They must complete the score slip with a legible signature or
enter their deductions into the computer.
d)	They must be able to provide a personal written record of their
evaluation of all exercises.

Article 5.4.3 Function of the Reference Judges
The Reference Judges (2 by apparatus) for Olympic Games and
World Championships were introduced to have an automatic and time
saving correction system in case of problems with Execution scores.
Other competitions may use Reference judges but are not obliged.

Article 5.5.1 The Timers and Line Judges
The Timers and Line Judges are drawn from among the Brevet
judges to serve as:
Line judges to:
-	 Determine on Floor and VT stepping outside of the border
marking and to acknowledge the fault by raising a red flag.

-	 Inform the D1 judge of any violation and deduction and sign
and submit the appropriate written record.
Time judges are required to:
-	 Time the duration of the exercise (FX).
-	 Ensure adherence to the warm-up time on PB.
-	 On FX give an audible signal to the gymnast at completion of
60 and 70 seconds.
-	 Inform the D1 judge of any violation and deduction and sign
and submit the appropriate written record.
-	 For time violations where there is no computer input, the time
judge must record the exact amount of time over the time limit.

Article 5.5.2 Functions of the Secretaries
The Secretaries need to have COP and computer knowledge. They
are usually appointed by the Organizing Committee. Under the supervision of the D1 Judge, they are responsible for the accuracy of
all entries into the computers:

Article 5.6 Seating Arrangements
The judges will be seated at a location and distance from the apparatus which permits an unobstructed view of the total performance
and which permits them to fulfill all of their evaluation duties.
-	 D- Panel Judges must be in line with the center of the apparatus.
-	 The timer sits by the Apparatus Jury (either side).
-	 The line judges at FX must sit at opposite corners and observe
the 2 lines closest to them.
-	 The line judge at Vault must sit at the far end of the landing
area.
-	 The placement of the E- jury will be clockwise around the apparatus beginning from the left of the D- Panel.

Variations in the seating arrangement are possible depending on
the conditions available in the competition hall.

Adherence to the correct order of the teams and gymnasts.
Operating the green and red lights.
Correct flashing of the Final Score.
Time the duration of the fall period.
Control the start of the exercise after the green light is lit.

Article 5.7 Judge’s Oath (TR 7.12)
At the World Championships, and other important international
events, juries and judges pledge to respect the terms of the Judges’
Oath:
“In the name of all the judges and officials, I promise that we shall
officiate in these World Championships (or any other official FIG
Event) with complete impartiality, respecting and abiding by the rules
which govern them, in the true spirit of sportsmanship.”

Article 5.8 MAG Naming of New Elements
Any new element performed at an FIG registered competition with an
official FIG TD or FIG MTC member participating, in an accredited
role and in attendance during the performance, is eligible for new
element recognition in the Code of Points. A video of the completed
element must be given to the TC member in attendance for later
review and evaluation at the following MTC meeting.

PART II
Evaluation of exercises

Section 6
The Evaluation of Competition Exercises

Article 6.1 General Rules
1.	Two separates scores, “D” and “E”, will be calculated on all apparatus.
-	 The D-jury determine the “D” score, the content of an exercise,
and the E-jury the “E” score, i.e. the exercise presentation
related to compositional requirements, technique and body
position.
-	 “D” score content will include by addition:
-	 The additional difficulty value of 10 elements (8 for
juniors), the best 9 (7 for juniors), but maximum 5 elements for the same Element Group, inside the best
counting plus the value of the dismount. If the judge
needs to choose the counting 9 (7 for juniors) elements
from elements which have the same value but belong to
different Element Groups, he must determine them to the
benefit of the gymnast. Once the 9 (7 for juniors) best
counting elements plus the dismount of the exercise are
determined, the judge must count among them not more
than 5 elements from the same element group (for FX,
the Element Group of the dismount will count first).


Example 1:
	
I	 III	 I	 II	 III	III	III	III	 I	 II	 IV
	
A	B	B	B	B	B	B	C	C	C	 D
	
	 B	B	B	B	B	B	C	C	C	 D

Example 2:

B	 B	B	B	B	B	B	D	D	D	D	 D
B		 B	B	B	B		 D	D	D	D	 D

In bold letters counting elements.

III	III	 I	 II	 II	 II	 III	III	III	III	IV	 IV

connections value, based on special rules on different
apparatus.
-	 Element Group Requirements Value, performed among
the 10 counting elements (8 for juniors).
-	 “E” score, will start from 10 points and will evaluate by deductions applied in tenths of a point:
-	 The total deductions for aesthetic and execution errors.
-	 The total deductions for technical and compositional errors.
-	 The highest and the lowest sums of total deductions applied
in tenths of a point for execution, aesthetic, technical and
compositional errors are eliminated. The average remaining

sums is subtracted from the 10 points in order to determine
the Final “E” Score.

Article 6.2 - Determination of the Final Score
1. The Final Score of an exercise will be established by the addition
of the “D” and final “E” scores.
2.	The rules governing the evaluation of the exercises and the determination of the Final Score are identical for all sessions of optional
competition (Qualification, Team Final, All Around Final, Apparatus
Finals) except for Vault, where special rules in Qualification and in
Apparatus Finals apply (see Section 13).
3.	The All-Around Score is the sum of the Final Scores obtained on
the six exercises.
4.	The Team Score is calculated in accordance with the current
Technical Regulations that govern that competition.
5.	Qualification for, and participation in, the Team Final, the All Around
Final, and the Apparatus Finals will occur in accordance with the
current Technical Regulations that govern that competition.
6.	The Final Score is normally calculated by the competition scoring
personnel but must be confirmed by the Apparatus Supervisor
before it is displayed.
7.	At official FIG competitions, the single “D” score from the D-jury
and the “E” score (the average of exercise presentation deductions
subtracted from 10 from each judge of the E-jury) will be displayed.
Each individual score of the E-jury will appear on the main results
form. At all other competitions, the “D” score, “E” score and the
Final Score must be displayed.

Article 6.3 - Short exercise
For exercise presentation, the gymnast may earn a maximum
E- Score of 10.00 points.
The D -Panel will take the appropriate neutral deduction (penalty)
for a short exercise from the Final Score.

Section 7
Regulations Governing the D score (DV)

Article 7.1 Difficulty
1.	On Floor Exercise, Pommel Horse, Rings, Parallel Bars, and
Horizontal Bar, the following difficulty values will count in all competitions:

Values	 A	 B	 C	D	 E	 F	 G	H
parts					
Value	 0.10	0.20	0.30	0.40	 0.50	 0.60	0.70	0.80

2.	To the extent possible, only single elements are included in the
Difficulty Tables. Each element is given a unique difficulty value
and a unique Code Identification Number.
3.	Elements that are not listed in the Difficulty Tables must be submitted for a difficulty rating to the Chair of the Superior Jury 24
hours in advance of podium training at official FIG Competitions.
Provisional difficulty ratings may be given by Technical Authorities
at other international, national, and local competitions.
5.	Elements that no longer appear in the Code are usually not permitted or fall below the value of an A.
6.	Elements in same box with different values may be performed in
the same exercise with both elements contributing to the “D” Score.

Article 7.2 Element Group and Dismount Requirements
1.	With this evaluation category, the judge evaluates those required
movement patterns which, in addition to the gymnast’s personal
inclinations and technical abilities, are intended to enhance the
variety of movement in the construction of an exercise.
2.	Each apparatus has three Element Groups designated as I, II, III,
and, except for Floor Exercise, a Dismount Group designated as
IV.
3.	In his exercise, the gymnast must include at least one element
from each of the three Element Groups.
4.	An element may meet the Element Group requirement only for the
Element Group under which it is located in the Difficulty Tables.
5.	Each Element Group requirement fulfillment (inside the 10 counting
elements) is awarded with 0.5 points by the D-jury.
6.	Every exercise must end with a legitimate dismount listed under
the Dismount Element Group. (see Section 10 and 13 for specific
regulations for Floor Exercise and Vault). Non-legitimate dismounts
include:
i.	 A dismount that pushes off the feet (except on Floor Exercise).
ii.	An exercise finished with a partially shown or incomplete
dismount.
iii.	A dismount that does not land on the feet (including rollout
elements on Floor Exercise).
iv.	A dismount that intentionally lands sideways.
NB. Such elements always lead to non-recognition by the D-jury
of the element and the Element Group.
4.	An element (or element with the same Code Identification Number)
may be repeated but such repeated element may not contribute
towards the “D” score. See additional regulations restricting repetition for Pommel Horse and Rings in Section 11 and 12.

7.	Regarding Dismount element group requirements, the following
rule will be applied:
- A or B value dismount 	 0.00 p. (does not fulfill requirement).
- C value dismount	
+0.30 p. (partial requirement value).
- D or higher value 	
+0.50 p. (full requirement value).
For juniors:
- A value dismount 	
0.00 p. (does not fulfill requirement).
- B value dismount	
+0.30 p. (partial requirement value).
- C or higher value 	
+0.50 p. (full requirement value).

Article 7.3 Connection Points
1.	This evaluation factor provides the D-jury with the possibility of
awarding special connections. Thereby, these Connection Points
serve to better differentiate the exercises which contain special
connections between elements, as particularly described on each
apparatus.
2.	Connection Points may be awarded only for directly connected
recognized high valued elements performed without a large error.

Article 7.4 Evaluation by the D-jury
1. The D-jury is responsible for evaluating the content of the exercise and determining the correct “D” score on each apparatus as
defined in Sections 10 to 15. Except in the circumstances defined
in Article 7.4 the D-jury is obligated to recognize and credit each
legal element that is correctly performed.
2.	The gymnast is expected to include in his exercise only elements
that he can perform with complete safety and with a high degree of
aesthetic and technical mastery. Very poorly performed elements
will not be recognized by the D-jury and will be deducted by the
E-jury.
3.	Each element is defined to the perfect end position or as being
performed with perfection.
4.	An element that is not recognized by the D-jury will receive no
value.
5.	An element will not be recognized by the D-jury if it deviates significantly from the prescribed execution. An element will not be
recognized or credited for reasons including, but not necessarily
restricted to, the following:
a)	If, on Floor Exercise, the element is performed beginning
outside of the floor area (see Section 10 Art. 10.2.1.3a).
b)	 If, on Vault, the gymnast performs an invalid Vault as defined
in Section 13.
c)	 If on Horizontal Bar, an element is performed with or from feet
on the bar (see Section 15).
d)	 If a hold element with straddled legs not listed in the difficulty
tables is performed on any apparatus.
e)	 If the element is so altered in performance that it can no longer
lay any claim to its identification number or value (see also
Appendix A.3.1), for example:
i.	 A strength element performed almost entirely with swing.
ii.	 A swing element performed almost entirely with strength.
iii.	A stretched position element performed with a distinct
tuck or pike or vice versa. In such cases an element is
normally given the value of the element as performed.
iv.	 A strength element normally performed with legs together
is performed with legs straddled.
v.	 A strength hold element performed with significantly bent
arms.
vi.	 An element in or to handstand on Rings that is controlled
with the legs or feet against the cables.
f)	 If the element has been completed with the assistance of a
spotter.
g)	If the gymnast falls on or from the apparatus during an element,
or alters, or interrupts it in some other manner.
h)	If the gymnast falls on or from the apparatus during an element
without having reached an end position that permits continuation with at least a swing.
i)	 If a strength hold element or a simple hold element is not held.
j)	 If a press or pull out comes from a strength hold element which
has not been recognized or credited for any reason.
k)	If a twisting element on most apparatus is performed with
an over- or under-rotation of 90° or greater or if a swinging
element is performed with a deviation from the perfect end
position of 45° or greater (see also Appendix A.3.1). In some
circumstances, especially on Vault, an over- or under-rotation
of 90° may result in the recognition of different value for the
vault by the D-jury.
l)	If, on Pommel Horse, elements in cross support or in side
support deviate from the correct support orientation by 45° or
greater for the greater portion of the element.
m) If strength hold positions or simple hold positions on any apparatus deviate from the correct horizontal body, arm, or leg
position by 45° or greater. This means, for example:
i.	 Inverted cross with the head of the gymnast entirely above
the circle of the rings. (This is usually >45°).
ii.	 Cross with the arm pits entirely above the circle of the
rings. (This is usually >45°).
iii.	 (see also Article 9.2.8).
6.	In all cases, the D-jury is to make decisions based on gymnastics
sense and to decide in the interests of the sport of gymnastics. In
cases of doubt, the benefit of that doubt must be given to the gymnast.
7.	Elements performed so poorly that they are not recognized by the
D-jury will normally be severely deducted by the E-jury as well.
8.	The elements with the highest difficulty values will be counted first
in cases of Special Repetition.
9.	For recognition of difficulty on Pommel Horse and Floor Exercise,
the dismount is always counted first.

Article 7.5 Repetition
1.	An exercise may not be repeated unless the gymnast has to interrupt his exercise for reasons outside of his control.
2.	If the gymnast falls on or from the apparatus, he may choose to
continue with his exercise from the fall or to repeat the missed
element for credit and continue from there. (See Article 9.2.5).
3.	No element (same Code Identification Number) may be repeated
for difficulty credit or for Connection Points. This applies also to
elements repeated in connections (exceptions: certain Pommel
Horse elements and circles that increase in value if performed
twice in special combinations, and Rings - see Section 11 and 12).
4.	If the difficulty of an element is not recognized for any reason, then
that element can also not meet an Element Group Requirement.

Article 7.6 D - Jury Evaluation

Gymnast’s Actions

D-jury evaluation

Fulfilling of Element Group Requirements

Adding 0.5 for each

Dismount Element Group Requirement

Juniors

A value dismount = + 0.0

B value dismount = + 0.3

C value dismount or higher = + 0.5



C value dismount = + 0.3
D value or higher dismount = + 0.5

Non-recognition of the Difficulty

Assistance by spotter in completion of element

Non-recognition of the Difficulty

Not holding

Non-recognition of the Difficulty

Repeated element

Errors leading to non-recognition
(see Article 7.4 and 9.4)

Permitted but given no value

Pushing with feet for dismount or
other non-legitimate dismount
Straddled strength hold or other
prohibited elements

Non-recognition of the element and
dismount element group requirement
No recognition of the element

Section 8
Regulations Governing E score

Article 8.1 Description of Exercise Presentation
1.	The Exercise Presentation consists of only those factors that constitute the essence of a contemporary gymnastics performance and
the absence of which results in deductions by the E-jury. These
factors are:
a)	The technical, compositional (general expectations for exercise
construction) aesthetic and execution.
2.	The Exercise Presentation has a maximum value of 10.0 points.

Article 8.2 Calculation of E-jury deductions
1.	The judges of the E-jury, will judge an exercise and determine
the deductions independently and do so within 20 seconds of the
completion of the exercise.
2.	Each performance is evaluated with reference to expectations
of perfect performance. All deviations from this expectation are
deducted.
a)	Deductions for errors in aesthetic and execution, technique
and composition are summed to a maximum of 10.0 points
for Exercise Presentation.

Article 8.3 Instructions for the Gymnast
1.	The gymnast must include in his exercise only elements that he
can perform with complete safety and with a high degree of aesthetic and technical mastery. The responsibility for his safety rests
entirely with him. The E jury is required to deduct very rigorously
for any aesthetic, execution, composition and technical errors.
2.	The gymnast must never attempt to increase the difficulty or the
“D” score at the expense of aesthetic and technical execution.
3.	All mounts must commence from the basic stand position, from
a short run (only Parallel Bars and Horizontal Bar), or from a still
hang. Pre-elements or intermediate elements may not precede
the mount. This rule does not apply to Vault where the specific
rules stated for that apparatus apply.
4.	Dismounts from all apparatus as well as the conclusion on Floor
Exercise and Vault must end in a standing position with the legs
together. With the exception of Floor Exercise, pushing from the
apparatus with the feet in order to execute the dismount is not
permitted.

Section 9
Technical Directives

Article 9.1 Evaluation by the E - jury
1.	The E-Jury is responsible for evaluating all of the aesthetic,
execution and technical performance aspects of an exercise as
well as its compliance with the composition (exercise construction
expectations) for that apparatus. In each case the E -Jury is to
demand that elements be performed with perfection and to perfect
end positions (see also Appendix A.2).
2.	The gymnast is expected to include in his exercise only elements
that he can perform with complete safety and with a high degree of
aesthetic and technical mastery. All deviations from that expectation will be deducted rigorously by the E-jury.
3.	The E-jury is not to concern at all with the difficulty of an exercise.
He is obligated to deduct equally severely for any error of the
same magnitude regardless of the difficulty of the element or the
connection.
4.	Judges of the E-Jury (and the D-jury) must remain up-to-date with
contemporary gymnastics, must know at all times what the most
contemporary performance expectation for an element should be,
and must know how standards are changing as the sport evolves.
In this context they must also know what is possible, what is
reasonable to expect, what is an exception, and what is a special
effect (see also Appendix A.3).
5.	The E-Jury must understand to refrain from deducting when some
elements, which otherwise have no errors, are performed for a
special effect or a special purpose. For example:
i.	 On Parallel Bars, a basket or a giant swing deliberately performed with flight and travel, and with a late re-grasp has a
special effect and purpose and should not be deducted for not
ending in handstand. However the onus is on the gymnast to
show the effect or purpose in an unmistakable and conspicuous manner.
ii.	On Horizontal Bar, a giant swing is often modified in preparation for release elements and dismounts. These should not be
deducted for not passing through a handstand unless they are
unnecessary or so extreme as to violate aesthetic, execution
and technical expectations.
6.	If for any reason a judge of the E-Jury cannot reach a decision,
he must give the benefit of the doubt to the gymnast.
7.	The E-jury is obligated to deduct twice for two distinctly different
errors in an element, i.e. if the element has both a technical and
an aesthetic execution error. For example a stützkehre on Parallel
Bars may receive both deductions for insufficient amplitude and
for bent knees.

Article 9.2 Determination of Execution and Technical Errors

1.	Each element is defined to the perfect end position or as being
performed with perfection. (See also Part IV).
2.	All deviations from correct performance are considered execution or technical errors and must be evaluated accordingly by the
judges. The amount of the deduction for small, medium, or large
errors is determined by the degree of deviation from the correct
performance. The same deduction is applied each time for the
same severity of bending, whether it be the arms, legs, or the body.
3.	The following deductions will apply for each and every discernible aesthetic or technical deviation from the expected perfect
performance. These deductions must be taken regardless of the
difficulty of the element or exercise.
Small Error	
Medium Error	
Large Error	
Fall	

0.1 p.
0.3 p.
0.5 p.
1.0 p.

a)	Small errors: (deduction = 0.1)
i.	 Any minor or slight deviation from the perfect end position
and from perfect technical execution.
ii.	 Any minor adjustments to hand, foot, or body position.
iii.	 Any other minor violations against aesthetic and technical
performance expectations.
b)	Medium errors: (deduction = 0.3)
i.	 Any distinct or significant deviation from the perfect end
position and from perfect technical execution.
ii.	 Any distinct or significant adjustments to hand, foot, or
body position.
iii.	 Any other distinct or significant violation against aesthetic
and technical performance expectations.
c)	Large errors: (deduction = 0.5)
i.	 Any major or severe deviation from the perfect end position and from perfect technical execution.
ii.	 Any major or severe adjustments to hand, foot, or body
position.
iii. Any full intermediate swing.
iv.	Any other major or severe violations against aesthetic
and technical performance expectations.
d)	Falls and spotter assistance: (deduction = 1.0 p.)
i.	 Any fall on or from the apparatus during an element
without having reached an end position that permits continuation with at least a swing (i.e. a distinct hang phase
on Horizontal Bar or a distinct support phase on Pommel
Horse after the element in question) or that otherwise
fails to display a momentary control of the element during
landing or re-grasp.
ii.	 -1.0 is the maximum deduction for an element with a fall,
and including all steps, touches, or support on the floor
or mat leading up to the fall. Other execution deductions
incurred for the element (height, landing extension, insufficient twist) still apply.
iii.	 Any assistance by a spotter that contributes to the completion of an element.
4.	On all apparatus at the end of the exercise, if a gymnast does not
perform a dismount, but lands intentionally on the feet, no deduction for a fall will be considered.
5.	After a fall on or from the apparatus, the exercise may be continued
within 30 seconds and the gymnast may use a necessary number
of elements or movements to return to his starting position but all
of these elements and movements must be performed with perfect
execution. He is permitted to repeat the missed element for credit,
except if the fall occurred during a dismount (except Pommel
Horse) or a Vault.
6.	Execution errors such as bent knees, bent arms, bad posture or
body position, poor rhythm, poor amplitude, etc. are listed in Articles
9.2 and 9.3 and are always deducted according to the degree of
error or deviation from what is considered perfect performance.

7.	Execution errors such as bending the arms, legs or body are
categorized as follows:
Small Error:	
Medium Error:	
Large Error:	

slight bending.
strong bending.
extreme bending.

Medium error	 Large error	 Non-recognition D-jury

	 up to 15°	
16° - 30°	
		Examples:

> 30°	

> 45°

a)	Deviations in hold positions of 30° and greater will receive a
large deduction from the E-jury. In addition, deviations of 45°
and greater will lead to the non recognition of the element by
the D-jury.
9.	A press from a static strength element that did not have its difficulty recognized for any reason will also not have its difficulty
recognized.
10. If the preceding strength hold element has received a deduction
for incorrect position, then the same deduction up to a maximum
of 0.30 points applies again to a press from that strength hold element if it is determined that the press has been simplified thereby.
This interpretation is intended only for circumstances where a high
position or a technically poor hold makes the subsequent press
easier (i.e. not for presses from faulty L sits, false grips, or for
time of hold positions). This deduction only applies to a high angle
deduction being applied to both elements connected by strength..
11. Technical deductions for angular deviation from the perfect end
position can also apply to swinging skills. In most cases the perfect
end position is defined as a perfect handstand, or during Pommel
Horse circles, as a perfect cross support or perfect side support
position. For swinging elements the following applies:
a)	On Floor Exercise, Pommel Horse, Rings, Parallel Bars and
Horizontal Bar, swing elements are often expected to be
performed through rather than to an exact handstand otherwise the rhythm of an exercise might be interrupted. For that
reason a small angular deviation of up to 15° from an exact
handstand is permitted up to the conclusion of the element. A
small deduction is taken if the deviation from the handstand
is between 16° and 30°.
b)	On Pommel Horse, circles and most elements must be performed in, from, or to within 15° of a perfect cross or side
support position. The appropriate angular deviation deduction
is taken each time the error occurs during an exercise. This
means that the E - Jury would deduct for each skewed circle,
whereas the D - Jury would not recognize the element if it
deviates from the correct support orientation more than 45°
for the greater portion of the element.
12. During swing elements which pass through or end in handstand
(see additional rule Art. 15.2 for Horizontal Bar), deviations from
the correct position will be penalized as follows:
up to 15º	
16° to 30º	
31° to 45º	
> 45º	

No deduction.
Small error.
Medium error.
Large error and non-recognition (D jury).

Note: Deviations in end positions for swinging elements of 45°
and greater (or for twisting elements, of 90° and greater) will
receive a large deduction from the E - Jury and will not be
recognized by the D-jury. However, in some cases, it may be
possible for an element with incomplete twist to be recognized
as a lower value element in accordance with the amount of
twist correctly completed.
13. On Rings, during swings to a hold position, the shoulders may
not rise above the final hold position. If the shoulders rise above
the final hold position, the deduction is:

Small error	
Medium error	
Large error	
Non-recognition	

up to 15º.
16° to 30º.
over 30°.
over 45º (D-jury).

14. All hold elements must be held for a minimum of 2 seconds measured from the moment that a complete stop position has been
reached. Elements that are not held will receive large deduction
and will not be recognized by the D-jury.
2 seconds 	
Less 2 seconds 	
Non stop 	

no deduction.
medium error.
large error and non-recognition.

15. Deductions for poor landings are listed in Article 9.4. A correct
landing is a prepared landing, not one which happens by luck to
end in a standing position. An element should be performed with
such excellent technique that the gymnast has fully completed it
and has had time to reduce rotation and/or extend the body prior
to landing.
16. Landings & Dismounts on the Feet without Deduction.
	 For safety reasons a gymnast may land or dismount with their feet
apart (enough to properly join their heels together) upon landing
from any salto. The gymnast must complete the landing by bringing his heels together without lifting and moving the front of his
feet. This is done by raising the heels off the mat and joining them
together without lifting the front of the feet. The arms must also be
in complete control with no unnecessary swings.
17. Additional technical deductions are listed in Article 9.4 and specifically for each apparatus in the appropriate Chapter.

Action (Without steps, hops, or arm
swings)

Result

Landing with feet slightly apart and gymnast lifts heels and joins both heels together without lifting and moving the front of his
feet

No deduction

Landing with feet slightly apart or less than
shoulder width apart and gymnast picks up
a foot moving both feet together, OR does
not join both feet together by lifting only
the heels

0.1 deduction for
landing with feet
apart


Landing with feet more than shoulder width 0.3 deduction for
apart, AND gymnast picks up one foot mov- landing with feet
ing both feet together, OR does not join apart
both feet together

Note:
-	 All other execution deductions (those while in the flight phase of
a salto or for lack of extension before landing) must always be
considered in addition to the landing requirements noted above.

Article 9.3 Expectations for Compositional Exercise Construction
1.	The expectations for Compositional exercise construction are those
aspects of an exercise that define the essence of our expectations
and understanding of a gymnastics performance on each apparatus; such things as using the full floor area; swinging without
stops; no repetition; etc. These are specifically defined for each
apparatus in the appropriate chapter.
2.	Exercise construction errors include, but are not restricted to, the
following:
a)	 Gratuitous separation of legs (medium error = 0.3 p. E-jury):
i.	 The gymnast may not perform elements with a separation
of legs that serves no useful purpose or that detracts from
the aesthetics of a performance. For example, on Parallel
Bars a Stützkehre or a pirouette may not be performed
with legs apart; on Horizontal Bar and Rings, elements
may not be performed with a back-forward separation of
the legs; on Rings, crosses, swallows, and handstands
may not be performed with a separation of the legs; etc.
Most elements permitted or required to be performed with
separated legs are listed in the Difficulty Tables.
b)	Repetition of elements
i.	 Repeating of elements is permitted but they cannot receive credit for difficulty or connection points. However,
they are evaluated normally by the E-jury.
c)	Layaways, empty and intermediate swings (medium or large
error = 0,3 or 0,5 by the E-jury):
i. 	 An empty swing is a swing at the end of which no element
is performed or no new support or hang position or grip
is achieved (medium error by the E-jury).
ii. 	An intermediate swing is two successive empty swings
(large error by the E-jury).
iii. 	Layaways are back swings in support or in upper arm
support that simply reverse direction and swing back
down in or to a lower hang or support position (also if
accompanied by a grip change) (medium error by the
E-jury).
d)	Lowering of Legs on Swings to Handstands.
	 The table below shows the actions to be taken for lowering of
the legs during swings to handstand:

E-Jury & D-Jury action

Angle Deviation from
original position

E-Jury & D-Jury action

Angle Deviation from
original position

-0.1 small

0-15°

-0.3 medium

16°-30°

-0.5 large

31°-45°

-0.5 large & non-recognition

>45°

3.	Exercise Construction stipulations and deductions that apply specifically to each apparatus are listed in the appropriate Chapters.

Article 9.4 E - Jury deductions
These deductions are to be applied on all apparatus and Floor
Exercise by the E-jury when the corresponding error is made. See
Sections 10 to 15 for additional errors and deductions specific to
each apparatus.

Non-distinct positions (tuck,
pike, straight).

Adjust or correct hand or
grip position each time.

Touching apparatus or floor
with legs or feet.

Bent arms, bent legs, legs
apart.

Saltos with knees or legs
apart.

Legs apart on landing.

Loss of balance during any
landing with no fall or hand
support. (Maximum -1.0
total for steps and hops).

≤ shoulder
width

> shoulder
width

≤ shoulder
width

> shoulder
width

Large step
or hop or
touching
the mat
with 1 or 2
hands

1.0 and non
–recognition by
the "D” Jury


Fall during any landing
without feet contacting mat
first.

Fall or support with 1 or 2
hands during any landing.

Other aesthetic errors.

Slight
imbalance,
small step
or hop, 0.1
per step

Atypical straddle.

Poor posture or body position or postural corrections
in end positions.

Unsteadiness, minor adjustment of feet, or excessive
arm swings on landing.

Large
0.50

Interruption of exercise
without fall.

Hitting apparatus or floor.

Medium
0.30

Gymnast touched but not
assisted by spotter during
an exercise.

Small
0.10

Deductions for aesthetic and execution errors

Walking in handstand or
hopping (each step or hop).

Error

Deviations in swings to or
through handstand or in
circle elements.
Angular deviations from
perfect hold positions.
Press from poorly held
positions.
Incomplete twists.

Lack of height or amplitude
on salto and flight elements.

Interruption lors d'un mouvement d'élévation.

Deux ou plusieurs tentatives
pour réaliser un élément de
maintien ou en force.

Medium
0.30

Large
0.50


31° - 45°

>45° and nonrecognition

up to 15°

16° - 30°

31° - 45°
>45°and non
recognition

deductions equivalent to those for the hold
position are repeated
31° - 60°

Additional or intermediate
hand support.

Strength with swing and
vice versa.

Interruption in upward
movement.
Lowering of legs on elements to a handstand (from
original position)

Unsteadiness in or fall from
handstand.

61° - 90°
>90°and non
recognition

15° - 30°

31° - 45°

>45° y sin

less 2 sec.

non stop and
non- recognition

0 - 15°

16°-30°

31° - 45°
>45° norecog.


swing or
big disturbance

fall over

Fall from or onto apparatus.

1,0

Intermediate swing or
layaway.

half or
layaway

Assistance by spotter in the
completion of an element.
Lack of extension in preparation for landing.

Other technical errors.

1.0 and non –
recognition by
the “D” Jury

whole

Two or more attempts at a
hold or strength part.

Duration of hold parts (2 sec.).

Deductions for Technical errors

Small
0.10

PART III
Apparatus

- Floor Exercise

- Pommel Horse

- Rings

- Vault

- Parallel Bars

- Horizontal Bar

Section 10: Floor Exercise

Dimensions: 12 m. x 12 m.

Article 10.1 Exercise description
A Floor Exercise is composed predominantly of acrobatic elements
combined with other gymnastic elements such as strength and
balance parts, elements of flexibility, handstands, and choreographic
combinations all forming a harmonious rhythmic exercise which is
performed utilizing the entire floor exercise area (12 m x 12 m).

Article 10.2 Content and Construction

Article 10.2.1 Information about Exercise Presentation
1.	The gymnast must begin his Exercise within the floor area, from
a still stand legs together. The exercise and evaluation begin with
the first movement of the feet of the gymnast.
2.	The gymnast must include only elements that he can perform with
complete safety and with a high degree of aesthetic and technical
mastery.
3.	Additional execution and exercise construction expectations are:
a)	The exercise must occur entirely within the floor area. Elements
initiated outside of the floor area will be evaluated in the normal
fashion by the E-Jury but will not be recognized by the D-Jury.
i.	 The space available for Floor Exercise is delineated by
boundary lines or colour separations. Lines are considered
to be a part of the floor area. The gymnast may step onto
the line, but not over the line or on the outside colour.
ii.	Going outside of the marked floor area will be controlled by
2 line judges who sit diagonally opposite each other near
the FX area. Each line judge observes the 2 boundary lines
nearest him. When line violations occur, the line judge must
advise the D1 judge in writing, using the following criteria:
- 	 Landing or touching with one foot or one hand outside
the floor area = 0,10.
- 	Touching with feet, hands, foot and hand or with any
other part of the body outside of the floor area = 0,30.
- 	 Landing directly outside the floor area = 0,30.
- 	 Elements initiated outside the floor area have no value.
The D1 judge will take the appropriate deduction from the
final score.
iii.	If the gymnast has stepped outside of the floor area, steps
required to return back into the area are not deducted.
b)	The duration of the Floor Exercise is a maximum of 70 seconds
which will be verified by a timer. There is no minimum time.
The Time Judge will give an audible warning signal at 60 seconds and again at 70 seconds to indicate the maximum time
prescribed to the exercise. The time is measured from the first
movement of the feet of the gymnast through to the dismount,
which must end in a standing position with legs together. If
the exercise does not comply with the prescribed time, the
timer will signal the judge D1 who will take the corresponding
deduction from the Final Score.
c)	The full floor area must be used. There is no limit regarding
the amount of times a diagonal may be used in succession for
acrobatic elements. However, the gymnast must go to and/or
from each corner or a 0.3 neutral deduction by the D-jury will
be taken once during the exercise.
d)	Pauses of two seconds or longer before acrobatic series or
elements are not permitted.
e)	Each acrobatic element or series must end in a visibly controlled landing before continuing to a non-acrobatic element.
Uncontrolled momentary landings during such transitions are
not permitted.
f)	 Dive rolls must show a momentary support of both hands; that
is, these may not be performed without hand support or with
contact only on the back of the hands.
g)	The exercise must end with an acrobatic element that lands
with both feet together.
h)	A gymnast must not use simple steps to arrive in the corner.
Simple steps occur when a gymnast repositions himself on
the floor area without any choreography (turning ≥180 degree,
jumping, lifting leg above horizontal during step, etc.).
4.	For a full list of errors and deductions governing Exercise Presentation, see Section 9 and the summary of deductions in Articles 9.4
and 10.3.

Article 10.2.2 Information about the D score
1.	The Element Groups (EG) are:
I. 	Non-acrobatic elements.
II. 	Acrobatic elements forward (saltos and handsprings) and
fwd. rollout elements (no salto).
III. 	Acrobatic elements backward (saltos and handsprings),
and Arabian elements.
2.	The dismount cannot be from Element Group I.
3.	For seniors, a double salto element is required in the exercise and
must be inside the 10 counting elements.
i)	 The deduction for aesthetic and execution errors in the saltos
is per element not for every salto included in the element.
4.	Information about Difficulty and elements group:
a)	Acrobatic elements can be connected but retain their independent values.
b)	For floor exercise, one element can fulfill only one Element
Group requirement. If one element is executed as dismount
(Element Group II, or III), it can fulfill only Dismount Group
requirement, and the gymnast must include one more element from the same Element Group as the dismount inside
the exercise in order to receive the respective Element Group
points. The element used for the dismount is the first of five
counted within a specific element group, except in the instance
of basic repetition.
c)	All Arabian elements are in the group of acrobatic elements
backward, Example Arabian double front ½ = same as double
back 1/1 (D value). The following Arabian elements (Jump
bwd. with ½ t. to double salto fwd.) have the same value and
Code box as the bwd. double salto element with the same
amount of twisting: Arabian dbl. str. ½ (Penev), Arabian dbl.
str. (Tamayo), and Arabian dbl. str. 1/1 (Hypolito).
5.	Information about connections (CV).
- Connections can be awarded on both sides of one element
and is not necessary to be inside 10 counting elements (but no
repetition permitted).
- D or higher + B or C = +0.1, D or higher + D or higher = +0.2
- (No connection for Counter Saltos, example Double salto bwd.
1/1 to salto fwd. 1/1).
- Limit of 2 connections total in an exercise.
6.	Additional information and regulations:
a)	3/2 salto elements with reception by and then spring from the
hands are not permitted.
b)	Saltos rollout and jumps to prone position are not permitted
for value.
c)	All permitted elements that finish with a rollout or finish in front
support position are listed in the Difficulty Tables. For safety
reasons, no new such elements are permitted.
d)	Unless otherwise indicated in the Difficulty Tables, circle and
flair elements have the same value and identification number.
Wende swings with legs apart are not permitted.
e)	Unlisted strength holds with straddled legs are not permitted.
f)	Elements involving two strength parts for one Code value
require a stop position in both strength parts to receive the
listed value, a lower value WILL be awarded if a stop occurs
for only one of the strength parts. Example: Manna (1 s.) and
press handstand (no stop)= C value for the Manna.
g)	All circles/flairs begin and end in front support.
7.	Special repetitions:
a)	A maximum of 2 strength elements (including strength handstands) may be performed in an exercise for content value.
	 Elements I.1 to I.48 are considered to be strength elements,
except:
		 - Element I.19 - Handstand (2 sec).
		 - Element I.31 - ½ or 1/1 turn in handstand or to handstand.
b)	A maximum of 2 circle, flair, or Russian value parts may be
performed in an exercise for content value.
8.	For a further list of regulations governing non-recognition of elements and other aspects of the “D score”, see Section 7 and the
summary of deductions in Article 7.6.
h)	No extra elements may be added before or after element I.94
(Flair to handstand hopping backward handstand pirouettes
and back to flair) for an increase in value.
	 Example: addition of a spindle before I.94 will NOT increase the
value. The MTC has applied a principle where only acrobatic
elements can be awarded more than a D value.
i)	 All Japanese handstands require closing of the legs.

Medium
0.30

Insufficient height in acrobatic
elements.

Lack of flexibility during static
elements.

Error

Roll-out elements without hand
support.

On back of
hands

Large
0.50

Without
support

Uncontrolled momentary landings (also in transitions).

Simple steps or transitions to
arrive to the corners.

Jump to prone landing after
salto

fall 1.00

Error
Exercise longer than 70 sec.
Non-acrobatic or illegal dismount (rolls).

Small
0.10

Medium
0.30

Large
0.50

≤ 2 sec.

>2 - 5 sec.

> 5 sec.

Element not recognized by D-jury

Landing or touching with one
foot or one hand outside the
floor area.

Touching with feet, hands, foot
and hand or with any other
part of the body outside of the
floor area.

Landing directly outside the
floor area.

No double salto element (for
Seniors only)


D Jury

Small
0.10

Pause 2 sec. or more before
element or acrobatic series.

Article 10.3 Specific Deductions for Floor Exercise.

Elements initiated outside the
floor area.

No value

A = 0,1

C = 0,3

B = 0,2

D = 0,4

E = 0,5

F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8

EG I:  Non-acrobatic Elements
1.From hdst. lower to L-sit or strad. L-sit (2 s.).

7.From stand, Swiss press to hdst. (2 s.).

3.V-sit with legs horiz. (2 s.).
(Manna)

	 Piked body, str. arm or str. body, bent arm press 	 V-sit (2 s) and press to hdst. (2 s.) also with strad. 	 Manna (2 s.) and press to hdst. (2 s.) also with
to hdst. with legs together (2 s.).
legs.
strad. legs.

	 Rock to hdst. from prone position (2 s.).
	 Swiss press from split, L-sit, strad. L-sit or front

	 Handstand (2 s.).

	 From Manna (2 s.), turn over (dislocation) to
handstand (2 s.).

	 Press or lower or swing to Japanese hdst. (2 s.). 	 From split press to Japanese handstand (2 s.).



A = 0,1

C = 0,3

B = 0,2

D = 0,4

E = 0,5

F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8

EG I: Non-acrobatic Elements

	 Support lever, legs straddle (2 s.).
	 Support lever (2 s.).
	 ½ or 1/1 turn in handstand or to handstand.	

From straddled support lever (2 s.) press hdst. 	 From support lever 2 s. press handstand (2 s.). 	 From Swallow 2 s. press to Japanese hdst. (2 s.).

	 Swallow (2 s.).
	 Endo roll to handstand (2 s.).
- May straddle the legs without deduction to reach the handstand position in the final phase of the element.
	 From stand or rear support, push off 1 foot
through hdst. or back walkover.
	 Cross or side split (stop required).
	 Spagat de frente o lat. (se necesita parar).
	
Any standing scale with 180° straddle, no hand
hold (2 s.).
	 Forward walkover.
	 Any standing scale (2 s.).
	 Jump bwd. to front support.
Jump bwd. with pike-stretch or with 1/1 turn to
front support.
	 Butterfly with 2/1 twist.
	 Butterfly.
	 Butterfly with 1/1 twist fwd. or bwd.
	 Breakdance variations.
	 2 circles or flairs.
Circles or flair to handstand.
	
Flair or circle to hdst. continue to flair or circle. 	 Flair hopping with 360° t. bwd. thr. hdst and back
to flair (2 hops).
	
Lower from hdst. to flair or circle.
Flair with ½ spindle.
2 cercles) directement à l’appui renverse.
Flair with >270 spindle (in 2 circles) directly to
	
Flair with 1/1 spindle (in 2 circles).
handstand.
	
Flair with ½ spindle to handstand.
Flair with > 270º spindle (in 2 circles) directly
to handstand and continue to circle or flair.
Russian wendeswing with 360° or 540°.
Russian wendeswing with 720° or 900°.
Russian wendeswing with 1080° or more.
Roll bwd. through hdst. with ½ t.
Roll bwd. with hop 1/1 t. through hdst.
EG II: Acrobatic elements forward (saltos and handsprings) & fwd. rollout elements (no salto)

	 Neck or head spring w. ½ t. to hdst. or 1/1 t. to
rear support.
Handspring salto fwd. tuck (Marinich style).
7.	 Renversement avant.
	 Forward handspring or flyspring.
	 Dive roll.
Jump with 1/1 twist to fwd. hdsp.
	 Salto fwd. tucked or piked.
	 Salto fwd. stretched.
	Salto fwd. str. to front support.
Double salto fwd. tucked.
	 Double salto fwd. piked.
	 Aerial walkover fwd.
	 Double salto fwd. tucked with ½ t.
	 Double salto fwd. piked with ½ t.
	 Salto tucked and piked ½ t.
	 Salto tucked with 1/1 t.
	 Salto fwd. str. with ½ t.
	 Salto fwd. str. with 1/1 t.
	 Salto fwd. str. with 5/2 t.
	 Salto fwd. str. with 3/1 t.
	 Salto fwd. str. with 2/1 t.
	 Salto tucked 3/2 t.
Salto fwd. str. with 3/2 t.
Salto fwd. t. or p. to front support.
	 Salto fwd. t., p or str. with 1/1 t. to front support.
	
	 Double salto fwd. tucked with 1/1 turn.
	 Jump fwd. with ½ t. to dbl. salto bwd. t. or p.
	 Salto backwards tucked or piked.
	 Salto backwards stretched.
	 Double salto bwd. tucked.
 Double salto bwd. tucked with 2/1 t.
	 Double salto bwd. t. or piked with 1/1 t. Also
Arabian double t. or p. ½ t.
	 Double salto bwd. tucked with 3/1 t.
	 Salto backwards tucked or piked w. ½ t.
	 Salto backwards str. w. ½ t.
	 Double salto bwd. tucked with 5/2 t.
	 Arabian double tucked or piked or double salto 	 Double salto bwd. t. with 3/2 t. or Salto bwd. str. 	 
bwd. t. or p. with ½ t.
3/2 to fwd. salto tucked
Back handspring.
Flic flac.
Tempo salto bwd.
	 Double salto bwd. piked.
	 Triple salto bwd. tucked.
Salto backwards tucked w. 3/2 t. .
	 Salto bwd. str. with 3/2 t.
	 Salto bwd. str. with 5/2 t.
Salto bwd. str. with 7/2 t.
Salto bwd. str. with 1/1 t.
Salto bwd. str. with 2/1 t.
Salto bwd. str. with 3/1 t.
	 Salto bwd. str. with 4/1 t.
	 Jump bwd. with ½ t. to roll fwd.
	 Jump bwd. with ½ t. to handspring forward.
Double salto straddled with 1/1 t.
	 Salto bwd. str. with 2/1 t and salto bwd piked.
	 Double salto bwd. stretched.
	 Arabian Jump bwd. to dbl. salto fwd. str. or 	
Double salto bwd. str. with 3/2 t. or arabian
double salto bwd. stretched with ½ t.
Jump bwd. to dbl. salto fwd. str. with 1/1 t.
Double salto bwd. str. with 2/1 t.
	 Double salto bwd. stretched with 1/1 t. or arabian 	
Doble mortal atrás extendido con 2/1 g.
Jump bwd. to dbl. salto fwd. str. with ½ t.
	 Double salto bwd. str. with 5/2 t.
	 Double salto bwd. str. with 3/1 t.

Section 11: Pommel Horse

Height: 105 cm from top of mat, 115 cm from the floor.

Article 11.1: Exercise description
A contemporary Pommel Horse exercise is characterized by a variety
of support positions on all parts of the horse, permitting different
types of circular swings with legs apart and together, single leg
swings and/or scissors, and swings through the handstand position
with or without turns. All elements must be executed with swing and
without the slightest interruption of the exercise. Strength and hold
elements are not permitted.

Article 11.2: Content and Construction

Article 11.2.1 Information about Exercise Presentation
1.	The gymnast must start his exercise from a standing position.
An approach step or hop is permitted. The evaluation begins the
moment the gymnast’s feet leave the floor.
2.	The gymnast must include only elements that he can perform with
complete safety and with a high degree of aesthetic and technical
mastery.
3.	Additional execution, technical and exercise construction expectations are:
a)	The exercise must consist exclusively of swings without visible
pauses or visible use of strength.
b)	Oblique positions during flair and circle work are not permitted.
Circles and flairs may be performed only in cross support or in
side support positions. Furthermore, all turning elements must
begin and end in either cross support or side support.
c)	Ideally circles and flairs must be performed with complete
extension. Lack of amplitude in body position is deducted
as an individual deduction on for each element. Circles with
a slightly hollow position are permitted. Hip breaks during
individual elements in an exercise should be deducted as
separate technical errors on each circle or flair.
d)	Wendeswings must be performed with legs together. Straddled
wendeswings are considered atypical and are deducted appropriately.
e)	During scissors and single leg swings, the gymnast must
demonstrate a significant elevation of his hips and a large
separation of the legs.
f)	 Handstand elements must be achieved with completely straight
arms and without any interruption of swing or obvious use of
strength.
g)	In flair or circle to handstand dismounts and elements returning
to flairs or circles (or support), execution deductions for hesitation, strength, bent arms, lowering of the hips, and unsteadiness must be considered on the rise to the handstand, within
the pirouette, the lower from the handstand, and the extension
of the flairs or circles upon completion of the element. There is
no deduction for bending of the hips on the rise to handstand.
h)	A dismount must normally cross the body of the horse and land
in cross stand facing along the long axis of the horse while
landing adjacent to the last hand support position.
i)	 A simple handstand dismount must cross the horse in order to
be recognized. A handstand dismount does not have to cross
the horse provided that It includes a turn of at least 270º from
the side support or 360º from the cross support.
j)	 Expectations for scissor to handstand elements:
-	 The gymnast is expected to swing to handstand without
strength or hesitation, with hips stretched throughout.
-	 A scissor to handstand with pronounced hip bend and
strength should receive these two separate deductions
from the E jury.
-	 Scissors to handstands demonstrating swing with strength
and/or lowering of the hips or legs will be deducted by the
E jury.
-	 All scissors to handstand require the legs to close.
k)	Clarifications concerning evaluation for Li Ning Scissor to
handstand performed with hand(s) stepping errors:
-	 Step down off pommel with one hand with return to the
single pommel = D value (D jury) and -0.3 + other execution errors (E jury) for uncontrolled handstand support.
-	 Step down off pommel with one hand with no return to the
single pommel= D value (D jury) and -0.5 + other execution errors (E jury) for uncontrolled handstand support.
-	 Step down off pommel with two hands= no value (D jury)
and -0.5 or -1.0 (dependent on continuance of exercise
or fall) + other execution errors (E jury).
	 Note: All other scissors to handstand with support of both hands
on the leather = no value (D jury) and -0.5 or -1.0 (dependent
on continuance of exercise or fall) + other execution errors (E
jury).
l) All dismounts other than handstand dismounts must be executed with the body at a minimum angle of 30º above the
shoulder horizontal line before landing. For angles lower than
30º, deductions will be applied according to the specific errors
and deductions table for pommel horse, Art. 11.3.
m) If a gymnast believes he did not receive value for his dismount,
he may repeat any dismount for value (one time only) within
30 seconds of completing the original attempt. If the original
dismount received a large deduction, and the dismount is
repeated, the large deduction must be increased to -1.0 by
the E jury.
4.	For a full list of errors and deductions governing Exercise Presentation, see Section 9 and the summary of deductions in Articles 9.4
and 11.3.

Article 11.2.2 Information about the “D score”
1.	The Element Groups (EG) are:
I. 	 Single leg swings and scissors.
II. 	Circle and flairs, with and/or without spindles and handstands, Kehrswings, Russian wendeswings, flops and
combined elements.
III. 	Travel type elements, including Krolls, Tong Fei, Wu
Guonian, Roth and Traveling Spindles.
IV. 	Dismounts.
2.	Additional information and regulations:
a)	General
a.1)	Unless otherwise indicated elements on the leather have
the same value as those performed on two pommels.
a.2)	Unless otherwise indicated all ½ turns (Czechkehres,
Stöckli and reverse Stöckli, double Swiss), have the same
value.
a.3)	Unless otherwise indicated, each element is defined as
occurring within one structure and ending when a new
structure is initiated, as follows (Exception: the combined
series provision):
i.	 A hop element ends at the completion of the hop or
series of hops.
ii.	 A circle or flair element ends when it changes to the
other.
iii.	 A spindle element ends when the spindle action stops.
iv.	 A front support element (wendeswing) ends when the
wende action stops.
v.	 Travel elements in cross support end when the travel
action or the cross support position is either interrupted by a circle or some other element or is ended
in some other way.
vi.	 For difficulty recognition purposes, travelling elements
can be considered finished as soon as the travel is
completed, front support position with both hands on
the applicable part of the horse.
viii.	In the Code of Points Belenki, Urzica, and Moguilny
(EG III) may begin from cross support (also facing
out) minus 90º on first turn AND final turn, with travel
from one end to the other
a.4)	From side sup. on 1 end., travel bwd. over both p. to
side sup. on the other end (3/3) in 2 circles w.- must be
completed with no pommels for D value.
a.5)	No partial value will be given to any travel element with a
fall. Example: Magyar travel with fall after the first pommel
while attempting to continue the travel action will receive
no value.
a.6)	All Sohn and Bezugo type elements from a stand (and not
from a circle element) will be valued two letters lower than
the value from the listed element in the Code of Points.
a.7)	A Russian Wendeswing to a dismount beginning in cross
support facing out must complete Russian(s) as listed
before the Wende to receive full dismount value.
a.8)	A Wu Guonian requires a minimum 360° of body turn to be
completed with one or two hands between the pommels.
a.9)	Tong Fei elements can be performed with 4 different types
of start/end positions. Three of these types require a full
circle to be completed after the end position (side to cross,
cross to side, cross to cross) for value.
a.10) No partial value will be given to any travel element
with a fall. Example: Magyar travel with fall after the first
pommel while attempting to continue the travel action
will receive no value.
a.11) No additional elements may be added to increase the
value of these elements:
•	 Kehre fwd., rev. Stöckli, kehre fwd. (Element III.64,
Moguilny).
•	 Kehre bwd., kehre fwd., kehre bwd. (Element III.70,
Belenki).
b)	Circles
b.1)	Unless otherwise indicated, all circle elements begin and
end in front support.
b.2)	Unless otherwise indicated, the value and identification
numbers of elements performed in circle or flair are identical. Such elements are illustrated at random in either the
circle or the flair positions throughout the Difficulty Tables.
This means Element II.28 can be performed several different ways:
•	 With legs together, side support 1/1 spindle inside
max 2 circles
•	 With legs straddled, side support 1/1 spindle inside
max 2 circles
•	 With legs straddled, side support 1/1 spindle inside
max 2 circles with hands outside of one pommel
b.3)	All basic circles in cross and side support (also on one
pommel) may end with a ¼ turn without changing the
structure or value of the element.
b.4)	Step up to pommel, with or without ¼ turn, is B value
Circle with ¼ turn on one pommel, and counts as start
to flop sequence (Element II.14).
c)	Handstand
c.1) 	There is no upgrade in value for turning within a handstand from scissors.
c.2)	 There is no upgrade in value for the performance of turning within a handstand (from circles or flairs) solely on the
pommels. Turning within a handstand requires a majority
use of the leather.
c.3)	When performing a 3/3 travel during a handstand (within
an exercise or dismount), “support” with one hand must
be shown on both ends of the horse to receive the 3/3
upgrade in value.
c.4)	Increases in Value for Handstands from circle or flairs:
1.	Circle or flair handstand dismounts.

Handstand

“D”

“B”

“C”

w/450° turn OR
3/3 travel*

C

D

E

w/450° turn AND
3/3 travel*

D

E

F

*3/3 travel requires minimum 270º turn.

2.	Circle or Flair Handstand and lower to leg swing.
*3/3 travel requires minimum 180º turn.
3. Circle or Flair Handstand and lower to circle/flair.
*3/3 travel requires minimum 180º turn.
c.5)	Swing with strength and/or lowering of the hips or legs
in achieving handstands from a scissor or from circles or
flairs (including dismounts) will receive the value for the
element and element group (D jury) with E-jury deductions. However, if there is a large error, no recognition will
be given for the handstand or dismount. In the case of a
large deduction, the gymnast will receive a -0.5 deduction
and only deductions for aesthetic errors (legs, feet, bent
arms, touch horse, etc.). No deductions for strength or
angle will be applied.
c.6)	All scissors through handstand on one pommel require
a change of arm or pommel to receive value.
d) Combine elements
d.1)	It is possible to combine certain elements on a single
pommel. There are two types of such combined elements
listed in the Element Group II:
i.	 Flop type elements may include combinations of any
of the following on one pommel: circle in side support
(with or without ¼ turn), circle in cross support (with
or without ¼ turn), Direct Stöckli B, and/or Direct
Stöckli A; and may include a maximum of two of the
same element in direct succession. Such combined
elements (flops) can only be of D or E value (i.e. 3
or 4 elements). As an exception a D flop performed
in flair = E, and an E flop performed in flair = F. Only
one such flop sequence may be used in an exercise

1 flop

for value.
The following examples illustrate this rule:
•	DSB + DSB + DSA = D value flop.
•	Circle on one pommel + DSB + DSB + DSA = E
value flop

ii.	 Combined sequences on one pommel of circle and/
or Stöckli A or B with Russian wendeswings. The
circle and/or Stöckli B can either precede or follow
the Russian wendeswings and must appear as 2
consecutive circle elements to be part of a two-flop
Combined Sequence. The DSA may only appear at
the end of the sequence. Only one of these combined
sequences may be used during an exercise.

2 flops

Russian

D

R18 or R27 (B)


E

R36 or R54 (C)


D

E

F

R72 or R90 (D)


F

G

R108 (E)


R18 ou R27 (B)


R36 ou R54 (C)


D

R72 ou R90 (D)


R108 (E)


iii.	 In any case when a combined element is involved,
the gymnast will not have the right to make use of
the same element three times in direct succession.
iv.	 Flop and combined elements must be separated
by minimum one circle with one hand off of the one
pommel
v.	 A DSB is considered finished in side support frontways on one pommel.
d.2)	No other double elements will be credited for higher
value. For example: 2 circles or 2 DSB’s in any position
receive credit only for the first circle or DSB and no value
or recognition for the second.
d.3)	DSA requires ¼ turn in and ¼ out.
e) Spindles
e.1)	Spindles in EG II in cross or side support with legs together or flair must be performed within a maximum 2
circles (3 front support positions after the original start
position) for D value.
e.2) There are two D value 1/1 Spindles (EG II) in the Code
of Points:
•	 Any side support 1/1 spindle w. legs strad. inside max.
2 circles- Element II.28.
•	 Any cross support 1/1 spindle within max. 2 circles.
(also with 1/3, ½ or 2/3 travel) (Magyar)- Element II.34.
	 Both may be performed in the same exercise.
f)	 Dismounts
f.1)	 Pommel Horse is the only apparatus where a dismount
may be repeated (one time only) if the gymnast determines he may not have received credit because of a fall or
a large deduction. This must be done within the allowable
time. If the gymnasts steps off the podium (this includes
the stairs), the exercise is terminated.
f.2)	 In the case of a repeated dismount, the gymnast has 30
seconds to remount the horse and perform any type of
dismount of his choice for value and EG IV.
f.3)	 Examples of repeating a PH dismount are:
	 Example 1
D Jury
evaluation

E Jury
evaluation

Falls while attempting the
handstand

No value or
EG IV

Successfully
repeats
St.
Handstand
270° t. 3/3 with
no deductions

Action

Gymnast

Stöckli

to
Handstand
270° t. 3/3 dismount attempt
Repeated
Stöckli
to
Hdstd. 270° t.
3/3 dismount
within the time
permitted.

Stöckli

to
Handstand
450° t. 3/3 dismount attempt

Lowers legs
with large deviation
then
completes dismount

No value or
EG IV

Repeated
Stöckli
to
Hdstd. 450° t.
3/3 dismount
within the time
permitted.

Successfully
repeats
St.
Handstand
450° t. 3/3 with
-0.0 deduction

E value (0.5)
and +0.5
EG IV

-0.5 (lowering
legs) and
any aesthetic
deductions

The -0.5
(lowering
legs) must
be changed
to -1.0 for a
fall plus any
deductions
viewed on
the second
attempt.

	 Example 3


Russian 1080°
Dismount attempt

Falls at 900°

Repeated
Russian 1080°
Dismount
within the time
permitted.

Successfully
repeats Russian
1080°
dismount with
-0.1 leg separation

D Jury
evaluation

E Jury
evaluation

No value

-1.0 and any
deductions
prior to the action of falling

D value (0.4)
and +0.5
EG IV

-0.1 for leg
separation

	 In Example 3, the judge cannot always determine if the first
Russians are a dismount attempt.
3. Special repetitions:
a)	A maximum of two (3/3) cross support travels (forwards and/
or backwards) are permitted during the exercise. This rule
applies to the following six travels ONLY:
•	 III.45 Travel fwd.in cross support with support on leather,
pommel, pommel, leather(3/3) (1-2-4-5), C value.
•	 III.46 Any other travel fwd. in cross support to other end
(3/3) (Magyar), D value.
•	 III.47 3/3 cross support travel fwd. with hop (Driggs), E
value
•	 III.51 Fr. cr. sup. on end, tr. fwd. in 2 circles to 1st p., to 2nd
p., with ¼ turn to side sup. on other end (3/3) (Bilozerchev),
C value.
•	 III.57 Travel bwd.in cross sup with support on leather,
pommel, pommel, leather(3/3) (5-4-2-1), C value.
•	 III.58 Any other travel bwd. in cross support to other end
(3/3) (Sivado), D value.
	 i.e. Nin Reyes type elements (3/3 travel with spindle) are NOT
considered with this rule.
b)	A maximum of two Russian Wendeswings are permitted for
value in an exercise, including the dismount. Excluded from
the rule are flop/ Russian combinations on one pommel, Kroll
(III.81), Roth (III.82), Wu Guonian (III.83), and Tong Fei type
elements (III.75, 76, 87, 89) elements.
c)	A maximum of 2 handstand elements are permitted for value
in an exercise from circles, flairs, or scissors (not including the
dismount).
5.	For a further list of regulations governing non-recognition of elements and other aspects of the “D score”, see Section 7 and the
summary of deductions in Article 7.6.

Article 11.3 Specific Deductions for Pommel horse
D Jury
Error
Non utilization of all 3 parts
of the horse.


Medium
0.30

Large
0.50

Petite
0.10

Moyenne
0.30

Handstand with visible
strength or bent arms.

Pausing or stopping in
handstand.

Landing oblique or not facing out from the long axis
of horse.

Lack of amplitude in scissors and single leg swings.

Hip Breaks with circles.

Bent or legs apart during
elements.

>15º- 30°

>30º- 45º

>45º
no - recog.

deviation >45

deviation
90º

Scissor to handstand with
hip bend.


Scissors to handstand
without closing the legs.

Lowering of legs on
elements to a handstand
(from original position)

Unsteadiness in the handstand dismount, turning
problems.

Large
0.50

Lack of body extension
in circles or flairs. Each
element

Angular deviations in cross
support circles and travels.

Small
0.10

Extra ½ swing on mount
without a leg changing
sides.

Error

E Jury

Small
0.10

no - recog.

0 - 15°

16°-30°

31° - 45°
>45° norecog.

	 Scissor forward.
Double Scissor Fwd. with Travel Sideways
through Handstand.
	 Scissor fwd. w. ¼ t. through hstd. on 1 p., lower
to sup. w. strad. legs on the other arm.
	 Scissor forward with ½ t.
	 Scissor forward with hop swd. (also with 1/2 t.).
Scissor fwd. with hop swd. from one end to the
other (3/3).

	 Scissor backward.
	 Double scissor fwd.(¼ t. fwd. a. ¼ t. bwd.).
	 Double scissor fwd. (¼ t. fwd. a. ¼ t. bwd.) with 	 Double scissor forward with hop sideways from
travel sdw.
one end to the other (3/3).
	 Scissor backward with ½ turn.
	 Swing bwd. w. ¼ t. through hstd. on 1 p., lower
to sup. w. strad. legs on the other arm.
EG I:Single leg swings and scissors
Scissor fwd. 1/4 t. to hdst., 1/4 t. and straddle
down bwd on 1 arm on the other pommel.
	 Scissor bwd.with hop swd.(also with ½ t.).
	 Scissor bwd. with hop swd. from one end to the
	 Double scissor bwd. (¼ t. fwd. a. ¼ t. bwd).
	 Scissor bwd. ¼ t. to hdst., ¼ t. and straddle down
bwd on 1 arm on the other pommel.
	 Leg cut or undercut bwd. through hdst. and 	 Leg cut or undercut bwd. through hdst. and
lower to flair or circle.
lower to support w. strad. legs.
EG II: Circle and flairs, with and/or without spindles and handstands,
Kehrswings, Russian w., flops and combined elements
	 Circle in side support on 1 pommel.
	 Any circle or flair in side support.
	 Circles in cross support frontways on end.
	 Circles in cross support rearways on end.
	 Circles in cross support between the pommels.
	 Circle with support outside pommels or between
the pommels.
	 Side support, ½ spindle.
	
Circle in side sup., ¼ spindle to cross sup.
	 Any side support 1/1 spindle w. legs straddle 	 Any side support 1/1 spindle with hand support to 	 Side support, 1/1 spindle with both pommels
inside max. 2 circles.
the other side and return (max. 2 flairs or circles).
between the hands (flair or circle).
	 Cross support on end, ½ spindle.
	 Cross support on end, circle with ¼ spindle to
side support.
	 Any cross support 1/1 spindle within max. 2 	 Cross support, 1/1 spindle with hands between the
circles. (also with ⅓, ½ or 2/3 travel).
pommels max. 2 circles. (also with ⅓ travel).
	 Flair or circle through hdst. and lower to sup. w. 	 Flair or circle through hdst. (with or without ½
strad. legs.
t.) and lower to flair or circle.
	 1/1 spindle w. legs straddle or together on the
pommels inside max. 2 circles.
	 Flair with hop travel bwd. through hdst. and 	 Flair with hop travel bwd. through hdst. and lower
lower to sup. w. straddle legs.
to circles or flairs.
	 Direct Stöckli A (DSA).
	 Reverse Stöckli or DSA strad. through hdst. and
lower to sup. w. strad. legs or circle.
Reverse Stöckli, DSA or pommel circle strad.
through hdst., 3/3 travel (fwd.- bwd), 360º turn
to flairs.
	 Direct Stöckli B (DSB).
	 Double rear (kehr).
Kehrswing bwd. hop with ½ t. on the pommels.
	 Kehr with 1/1 turn on 1 pommel.
	 Kehr with 270º t. on 1 p. (Sohn technique) from 	 Kehr with 270º t. on 1 p. (Sohn technique) from
cross to side support.
side to cross support.
	 Direct Tramlot.
Reverse Stöckli with 270° t. to 1 pommel.
	
Reverse Stöckli, 180° or 270° turn in one circle. 	
from side support using 1 or 2 pommels.
Reverse Stöckli with 360° t. on 1 pommel.
	 Double Swiss.
	
Czechkehre outside p.
	 Schwabenflank.
	 Czechkehre on the leather or pommels.
	 Russian wendeswing with 180° or 270°.
	 Russian wendeswing with 360° or 540°.
	 Russian wendeswing with 720° or 900°.
Russian wendeswing with 1080° or more.
On the leather, Russian wendeswing with 720° 	
On the leather, Russian wendeswing with
On the leather, Russian wendeswing with 180°,
or 540°.
or 900°.
1080° or more.
or 270° also with travel.

Russian wendeswing with 180° or 270° on 1 	
Russian wendeswing with 360° or 540° on 1 	
720° or 900° Russian wendeswing on 1 pom- 	
1080º Russian wendeswing or more on 1
p. or between the pommels.
pommel or between the pommels.
mel or between the pommels.
pommel or between the pommels.

EG III: Travel type elements, including Krolls, Tong Fei, Wu Guonian, Roth and Traveling Spindles
	 Circles with travel fwd. in side support (also with 	 Circles with travel fwd. in side support (3/3).
	 Circles with travel fwd. in side support (3/3),
	 From side sup. on 1 end., travel fwd. over both
¼ t.).
hands between pommels.
p. to sup. on other end (3/3) in 1 circle.
	 Circles with hop travel fwd. in side support.
	 Circles with hop tr. fwd. 2x in side support (3/3).
over both p. to sup. frontways on other end.
	 Circles with travel bwd. in side support.
	 Circles with travel bwd. in side support (3/3).
	 Circles with travel bwd. in side support (3/3),
hands between pommels.
	 From side sup. on 1 end., travel bwd. over both p.
to side sup. on the other end (3/3) in 2 circles w.
	 Circles with travel bwd. with hop 2x.
	 Circles with travel bwd. with hop.
	 From side support on one end, travel hop over 	 From side sup. beside the p., travel hop o. 2 p.
both p. to sup. frways on other end (1-2 to 4-5).
to sup. fwd on other end (1-1 to 5-5).
	 All travels with ½ spindle in cross support (1/3 	
All travels with ½ spindle in cross support (½
travel).
or 2/3 travel).
	 From an end side travel with 2x ½ spindle to
other end.
	 All travels with ½ spindle in side support.
	 Travel fwd. or bwd. with ¼ spindle to side support
	 Cross travel fwd. 3/3 with ½ Spindle from one 	 Travel 3/3 over both pommels with ½ Spindle.
pommel over the other pommel.
	 3/3 cross support travel fwd. with hop.
	 Travel fwd. in cross support (½ or 2/3).
	 Any other travel fwd. in cross support to other
	 Travel fwd. in cross support with support on
end (3/3).
	 3/3 cross support travel fwd. in flairs.
leather, pommel, pommel, leather(3/3) (1-2-4-5).
(3/3).
	 Fr. cr. sup. on end, tr. fwd. in 2 circles to 1st p., to
2nd p., with ¼ turn to side sup. on other end (3/3).
Any other travel bwd. in cross support to other
	 Travel bwd. in cross support (½ or 2/3).
	
Travel bwd. in cross sup with support on leather,
end (3/3).
	
Any other travel bwd. in cross support to other
	 Travel bwd. in cross sup. from one horse part
pommel, pommel, leather(3/3) (5-4-2-1).
or pommel to another (⅓).
Kehre fwd., rev. Stöckli, kehre fwd.
	 From support on end, kehr fwd. around 1 p., rev.
Stöckli around 2nd p. to side sup., p. betw. hands.
	 Kehre bwd., kehre fwd., kehre bwd.
	 From sup. on 1 p., Russian wendeswing fwd.
to other end without sup. on or btw. the p. (side 	 From sup. on end, Russian wendeswing fwd. to
to side support, side to cross support, cross to
other end without sup. on or btw. the p. (side to
side support).
side support, side to cross, cross to side, cross
to cross) with full circle after.
Any Russian wend. with 360° t. and 3/3 travel.
	 From side support pommel between hand, rus- 	
	 Any 3/3 travel in Russian type wendeswing with
sian wendeswing 360º with travel to the other
720° or more turning.
end in side support.
Reverse Stöckli from cross support on one end 	 On the leather, from cross support, Russian
wendeswing with 360° or 540º over both pomto the other.

EG IV: Dismounts 
	 Wende (from circle or flair).
	 DSA to hdst. 3/3 with 450º or more turn.
	 From side sup. on end, circle or flair to hdst. and 
travel 3/3 with 450° or more turn.
	 On the end, Russian wendeswing with 360° or 540°. 	 On the end, Russian wend. with 720° or 900°. 	 On the end, Russian wendeswing with 1080º or
more.
	 DSA with hop bwd. through hdst. on other end.
	 DSA, rev. Stöckli or circle on one pommel
fw. followed by Schwabenflank a. wende off.
through hdst.
	 Circle or flair through hdst. (also with ¾ t. with 	 Circle or flair with hop travel bwd. thr. hdst.
or without travel).

Section 12: Rings

Height: 280 cm from the floor.

Article 12.1 Exercise description
An exercise on the Rings is composed of swing, strength and hold
parts in approximately equal portions. These parts and combinations
are executed in a hang position, to or through a support position,
or to or through the handstand position, and execution with straight
arms should be predominant. Contemporary gymnastic exercises are
characterized by transitions between elements of swing and strength
or the reverse. The swinging of the cables and the crossing of the
cables are not permitted.

Article 12.2 Content and Construction

Article 12.2.1 Information about Exercise Presentation
1.	From a still stand, the gymnast must jump or be assisted to a still
hang on the Rings with legs together, and with good form. The
evaluation begins with the first movement of the gymnast from the
moment he leaves the floor. The coach is not permitted to give the
gymnast an initial swing.
2.	The gymnast must include only elements that he can perform
with complete safety and a high degree of aesthetic and technical
mastery.
3.	All exercises should contain an approximately equal distribution
of swing, hold and strength elements. Consequently, an exercise
cannot include more than three elements from groups II and/or III
in direct succession.
4.	Back swings in support that do not lead to at least a value part but
simply reverse direction and swing back down in or to a lower hang
position are deducted by the E-jury. A typical example of such a
layaway on rings is: from a kip to support, swing back to layaway
to front uprise.
5.	Additional Technical, aesthetic and execution aspects in the exercise construction expectations are:
a)	Hold positions must be reached directly, with straight arms,
and without need for positional or postural corrections.
b)	All hold positions must be held for a minimum of 2 seconds.
c)	Upward swings must lead to or through a handstand, or directly
to a strength hold element whenever the nature of the swing
permits.
d)	During all swing to strength hold elements, the shoulders
may not rise above the level of the final hold position. Any
deviation will result in the appropriate deductions by the E-
jury and, depending on the nature of the element, may lead
to non-recognition by the D-jury.
e)	Swing elements that lead to strength hold elements which must
reverse direction (i.e. front uprise to Swallow; front uprise to
inverted cross and so on…) will be counted as two elements.
f)	 A false grip (over grip) for strength holds is not permitted. A
false grip is performed with the wrists bent in order to gain an
advantage in performing a strength element, deduction -0.1
each time.
	 No false grip: straight wrists with or without the fingers of the
hands wrapped around the Rings.
	 Note: The position of the rings in the hands (with straight wrists
and open hands) does not change the evaluation (no false
grip).
g)	Straight arms must be used whenever the nature of the element permits it.
h)	 Composition errors with deductions of -0,30 points. Example:
	 Honma to support then lift to L sit OR Straddle L sit to L sit
OR Kip to support then L sit, etc.
i)	 Only for strength elements to handstand with bent arms,
where the necessary technique requires minimal touching of
the straps with the lower arms, no deduction should be taken
for contact with the straps (Elements II.25 and II.26).
6.	Yamawaki/Jonasson elements showing a full support or pause
will receive a 0.5 deduction for swing with strength (receiving
non-recognition). These elements with less support shown will
be recognized with small and medium deductions for swing with
strength.
7.	Gymnasts demonstrating very little change in body position after
moving from one hold position to another are subject to execution
deductions and possible non-recognition (i.e: Swallow to support
scale and Hanging scale rearways to Swallow).
8.	For a full list of errors and deductions governing Exercise Presentation, see Section 9 and the summary of deductions in Articles 9.4
and 12.3.

Article 12.2.2 Information about the “D score”
1.	The Element Groups (EG) are:
I.	 Kip and swing elements & swings through or to handstand
(2 sec.).
II. 	 Strength elements and hold elements (2 sec.).
III. 	 Swing to Strength hold elements (2 sec.).
IV. 	Dismounts.
2.	Repeated elements (same Code Identification Number) cannot
contribute to the “D” score. On Rings, this rule is extended so that
not more than 3 elements from groups II and/or III can be presented
in direct succession. The 4th and subsequent Elements from Group
II and/or III of the same sequence will be considered as repetition,
and not recognized by the D jury. However if the gymnast decides
to execute more elements from Element Groups II and/or III, in
order to be recognized by the “D” Jury, he must perform at least a
B value swing element from elements Group I (except any kind of
kip/back kip, or element in the same Code box) between the first
sequence of maximum 3, and another element or sequence from
Element Groups II and/or III.
	 This swing element of at least a B value must have to be among
the 10
3.	Special repetitions:
a)	Repeated elements (same Code Identification Number) cannot
contribute to the “D” score. On Rings, this rule is extended so
that a maximum of 1 final strength position in each EG may be
recog­nized for difficulty. Thus, for example only two cross type
elements (regular, L cross, or V cross) or support scale type
elements (regular or straddled) are permitted in an exercise for
difficulty value (one in Group II and one in Group III).
b)	A maximum of 2 Guczoghy and a maximum of 2 Li Ning type
elements can be present in the exercise, the 3rd and subsequent
within either type of element will be considered as repetition.
4.	Additional information and regulations:
a)	All holds must be held for a minimum of 2 seconds. They will
be not recognized by the “D” Jury for Difficulty and/or Elements
Group requirements if no stop position is shown.
b)	Strength presses and lifts which follow a previous hold element
and end in a 2 second hold position are recognized only if the
preceding hold part has been recognized and if a stop position
is shown.
c)	Elements with crossing of the cables are not permitted, being
deducted as composition errors.
d)	For juniors, elements which include saltos backward in hang
and Li Ning type elements are not permitted.
e)	Pineda type elements must be executed with straight body,
straight arms, a momentary hold in the front lever and slowly
to avoid deduction or classification as a swing to strength
element.
f)	 Yamawaki/Jonasson elements showing a full support or pause
will not be recognized for difficulty. A Honma to support and
fwd. swing out to hang will not be recognized as separate
values because of the gymnast’s intent.
g)	All V hold positions (2 sec.) must be performed with legs vertical. This is the same as the requirement for Floor Exercise.
h)	An exercise must start in a hang position with arms vertical
and straight. The gymnast may NOT bend their arms in moving to the first position unless specifically needed for element
completion. Example: Cast up and underswing backward may
be started with bent arms any time during an exercise.
i)	 During an exercise, a gymnast may only bend their arms during a transition between elements when necessary to properly
perform the next element.
j) For the hold of a non-listed part for 2 seconds or more, deduct
-0.1 each time. Some elements typically featuring this problem
(hold of 2 sec. or more) include: inverted hang, inverted pike,
and dorsal hang.
k)	Nakayama elements must pass through a complete hanging
scale rearways to prevent execution deductions and potential
non-recognition.
l) A dorsal hang to Cross or V Cross is not an acceptable entry
position to elevate the value for either cross (or any other
strength element). If either cross is performed directly from a
dorsal hang, each will retain its independent Code of Points
value (B and C respectively).
m) One Swing to handstand element (2 s. hold) is required in the
exercise and must be inside 10 counting elements.
5.	For a further list of regulations governing non-recognition of elements and other aspects of the “D score”, see Section 7 and the
summary of deductions in Article 7.6.

Article 12.3 Specific Deductions for Rings
D Jury


More than 2 times element Guczoghy or 2 times element Li Ning.

Supporting or balancing with
feet or legs on cables.

Fall from handstand.

Excessive swing of cables.

Preceding strength hold high
angle- press to strength (also
apply to 2nd element).

no-recog
per
element

Bent arms during swing to
strength hold parts or to establish hold position.

Touching cables or straps with
arms, feet or other parts of body

per
element

Compositional errors.

False grip (over grip) during
strength holds (each time).

Large
0.50

Legs apart or other poor execution during jump or lift to Rings.

Medium
0.30

Hold of a non-listed part for 2 s.
or more.

Error

Crossing cables during any
element.

Layaway on the back swing.

and non-recognition by the D-jury

Small
0.10

Coach gives gymnast an initial
swing.

Large
0.50

Pre-swing before start of
exercise.

Medium
0.30

E Jury

Error
No swing to handstand.


EG I: Kip and swing elements & swings through or to handstand
	 Uprise fwd. to support.
	 From a hang or support, back toss to hang rw.
to uprise fwd. to support.
	 Swing bwd in support, fall to bwd swing in hang. 	 #1 and counter salto fwd. to bwd swing in hang.
(also from Li Ning).
	 From hang, underswing w. shoulders above
rings.
Prohibited for junior
	 Tucked double felge bwd. to hang.
	 Piked double felge bwd. to hang.
	 From hang, felge upward to support.
	 Swing fwd. with straight arms through hdst.
	 Stretched double felge bwd. to hang.
	 Dislocate bwd. piked or stretched.
	 Felge upward to support with straddled legs
supported above the rings (2 s.).
	 Uprise bwd. to support.
	 Uprise bwd. or giant swing piked or str. through
handstand.
	 Inlocate piked or stretched.
	 Honma stretched.
	 Backward swing to salto fwd. p. to support.
	 Slow inlocate from hang.
	 Double salto fwd. tucked to hang.
	 Double salto fwd. piked or stretched to hang.
	 Kip to support.
	 Back kip to support.
	 Back kip with straight arms to support.
	 Fwd. swing to swing bwd. in hang.
	 Uprise bwd. to straddled L-sit (2 s.).
	 Bwd. swing, salto fwd tuck or piked to support.
	 From support or cross, felge bwd. piked or
stretched to support.
	 Back kip or roll bwd str. to handstand (2 s.).
	 Swing fwd. with straight arms to hdst. (2 s.).
	 From support swing bwd. to handstand (2 s.). 	 Honma and swing bwd. to handstand (2 s.).
	 Honma str. and swing bwd. to handstand (2 s.).
	 Uprise bwd. or giant swing to handstand with
straight arms (2 s.).
	 L-sit (2 s.) or straddled L-sit (2 s.).
	 V-sit (2 s.).
	 Inverted cross (2 s.).
	 Press from inverted cross to handstand (2 s.).
	 Hanging scale rearways (back lever) (2 s.).
	 Support scale straddled (2 s.).
	 Support scale (planche)(2 s.).
	 Support scale at ring height (swallow or maltese 	 Inverted swallow (2 s.).
cross) (2 s.).
	 Hanging scale frontways (front lever) (2 s.).
	 Suspensión facial horizontal (2 s.).

	 Any cross (2 s.).
	 V cross (2 s.).
	 V Cross, press to V-sit (2 sec.).

	 EG II: Strength elements and hold elements (2 sec.)
	 Press to hdst. with bent body and bent arms (2 s).
Pineda to inverted Cross (2 s.).
Press to hdst. with str. body a. bent arms or b. 	
Press to hdst. with str. body and str. arms or 	
Press to hdst. with str. body and str. arms from 	
body. a. str. arms, or fr. strad. sup. lever (2 s.).
from sup. lever (2 s.).
swallow (2 s.).
	
- Also straddle legs.
	 Slow roll fwd. piked to support.
	 Slow roll fwd. stretched to support.
	 Slow roll fwd. stretched with straight arms to 	 Slow roll fwd. stretched with straight arms to
handstand (2 s.).
inverted cross (2 s.).
	 Pineda to V cross (2 s.).
	 Slow roll bwd. slowly with str. arms and str. body 	 Slow roll fwd. stretched (bent or straight arms) 
	 Pull with straight arms and body through momentary front lever to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
to L sit (2 s.).
to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
	 Pineda through cross to support scale (2 s.).
	 Pull with straight body and arms through moment. front lever to swallow (2 s.).
	 Vertical pull up with bent arms to hanging scale 
	 Vertical pull up with straight arms to hanging 	 Roll bwd. slowly with str. arms and body to cross
rearways (2 s.).
scale rearways (2 s.).
or L-cross (2 s.).
dorsal horizontal (2 s.).
	 Nakayama to V cross (2 s.).
	 Fr. cross or L-cr., turn fwd. to back lever (2 s.). 
	 Vertical pull up with straight arms to L-sit (2 s.). 	 From or through hanging scale rearways, with
	 Through hanging scale rearways (no hold restraight arms pull to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
quired) pull with str. body through cross to inv.
swallow (2 s.).
	 From hdst., lower horiz. to back lever (2 s.).
	 From sup. or cross, lower slowly with str. arms 	 Vertical pull up with straight arms to cross or
L-cross (2 s.).
	 From planche, lower horiz. and slowly to hangsión dorsal horizontal (2 s.).
ing scale rw. and press to swallow (2 s.) or from
swallow same to planche or planche to planche.
	 From handstand, lower slowly with straight arms
through inverted cross to inverted hang.
	 From swallow, press to support scale (2 s.).
From swallow , lower slowly to handing scale, 	 From hanging scale rw. press to swallow (also
press to swallow (2 s.).
to Support Scale) (2 s.).
	 From L-cross, press to inverted cross (2 s.).
(2 s.).
	 From L-sit, press to inverted cross (2 s.).
From cross, press with straight body to inverted
cross (2 s.).

	 From swallow, press to inverted cross (2 s.).
	 From support lever, press to inverted cross (2 s.). 
	
From cross or L-cross, press to L-sit (2 s.).
	 From cross, press to swallow (2 s.).
	 From cross, press to planche without first going 
to support (2 s.).
horizontal (2 s.).
	 From inverted cross lower slowly to inverted 	 From inverted cross lower slowly to inverted
hang and felge bwd. slowly to swallow (2 s.).
hang and felge bwd. slowly to cross (2 s.).
Roll bwd. slowly with str. arms and body to swallow (2 s.).
	
Roll bwd. slowly with str. arms and body to free sup. scale (2 s.).
Azarian to inverted Swallow (2 s.).
horizontal (2 sec.).
	
From hang vertical pull up with straight arms 	
Slowly roll fwd. str. w. str. arms through Cross
to swallow or to support scale (2 s.).
and press to planche without first going to support (2 s.).
Slow roll fwd. with str. body and arms to Cross
or L-Cross (2 s.), also from inverted hang.
	 Through hang rearways press with straight arms
and straight body to inverted cross (2 s.).
Slow roll fwd. with straight body and arms 	
From hang vertical pull up with straight arms to
through cross to inverted cross (2 s.).
inv. cross (2 s.).

EG III: Swing to Strength hold elements (2 sec.)
	 Uprise fwd. to L-sit, (2 s.).
	 Uprise fwd. to V-sit (2 s.).
	 Kip to L-sit (2 s.).
	 Kip to V-sit (2 s.).
	 Backward swing to salto fwd. p. to L-sit (2 s.).
Prohibited for junior
	 Salto fwd. betw. rings direc. to cross / L-cross (2 s.). 	 Salto fwd. between rings directly to V cross (2 s.).
	 Bwd. swing, salto fwd p. to cross or L- cross (2 s.).
	 Uprise fwd. to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
	 Uprise bwd. to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
	 Li Ning or Li Ning 2 to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
	 Li Ning or Li Ning 2 to V Cross (2 s.).
	 Kip to V cross (2 s.).
    Uprise fwd. to inv. swallow w.o. supp. phase (2 s.).
	 Felge upward to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
	 Felge upward to sup. scale at ring height (2 s.).
	 Kip to cross, or L-cross (2 s.).
	 Kip to inverted swallow (2 s.).
	 Back Uprise to V Cross (2 s.).
	 Uprise bwd. to sup. scale at ring height (2 s.). 
	 Back kip to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
	 Felge upward to support scale straddled (2 s.). 	 Felge upward to support scale (2 s.).
	 Uprise bwd. to support scale straddled (2 s.). 	 Uprise bwd. to support scale (2 s.).
	 Back kip to support scale at ring height (2 s.).
	 Back kip to support scale straddled (2 s.).
	 Back kip to support scale (2 s.).
	 Felge bwd. stretched to free sup. scale (2 s.).
	 Felge upward with straight arms to invert. cross
	 Uprise bwd. to inverted cross (2 s.).
Back kip to inverted cross (2 s.).

EG IV: Dismounts
	 Salto fwd. piked or stretched.
	 Salto fwd. piked or stretched with ½ t.
	 Salto fwd. piked or stretched with 1/1 or 3/2 t. 	 Salto fwd. piked or stretched with 2/1 t.
	 Double salto fwd. tucked or tucked with ½ t.
	 Double salto fwd. tucked with 3/2 t (also 1/1 t.).
	 Double salto fwd. piked or piked with ½ t.
	 Double salto fwd. piked with 3/2 t. (also 1/1 t.).
	 Uprise bwd. and salto bwd t.
	 Uprise bwd. and salto bwd p. or str. 1/1 t.
    Uprise bwd. and salto bwd str. with 1/1 t.
	 Salto bwd. piked or stretched.
	 Salto bwd. stretched with ½ or 1/1 t.
	 Salto bwd. stretched with 2/1 t. or 3/2 t.
	 Salto bwd. stretched with 3/1 t.
	 Double salto bwd. tucked or piked.
	 Double salto bwd. stretched.
	 Triple salto bwd. tucked.
	 Double salto bwd. t. with ½ or 1/1 t.
	 Double salto bwd. t. with 3/2 t.
	 Double salto bwd. t. with 2/1 t.
	 Double salto bwd. t. with 5/2 t.
	 Salto bwd. str. with 1/1 t. and salto t.
	 Double salto bwd. stretched with ½ or 1/1 t.
Double salto bwd. stretched with 3/2 or 2/1 t.

Section 13: Vault

Height: 135 cm measured from the floor

Article 13.1 Description of a Vault Exercise
The gymnast must perform one vault except in Qualification for Vault
Finals and in Vault Finals where he must show two vaults from different Vault Groups and with different 2nd flight phases (for higher
difficulty vaults). For example: different direction - fwd./bwd and/or
different position - tucked/piked (for simple saltos) or minimum ½ turn
difference (for twisting saltos and simple flights). Each vault begins
with a run and a takeoff from both feet (with or without a round off) to
the vault board with legs together and is executed with a brief support
phase on the table with two hands. The vault may contain single or
multiple turns around the two axes of the body. After the first vault,
the gymnast returns without delay to the starting position and, at the
signal of the D1 Judge, performs his second vault.

Article 13.2 Content and construction

Article 13.2.1 Information about Exercise Presentation
1.	The gymnast must begin vault from a still stand with legs together
at a maximum distance or 25 meters, measured from the front edge
of the table to the inner side of the block attached at the end of the
vault run up mat. The vault begins with the first step or hop of the
gymnast, but the evaluation begins the moment his feet contact
the vaulting board. The length of the approach must be marked
on or alongside the approach lane.
2.	The vault ends with a landing behind the table in a standing position with legs together facing either towards or away from the table
(frontways or rearways).
3.	The gymnast must show only vaults that he can perform with
complete safety and with a high degree of aesthetic and technical
mastery. He is required to show the Identification Number of his
intended vault before he vaults.
4.	The gymnast may take-off only forwards or backwards and with
legs together. The only element that may be performed before the
vaulting board is a round off. For such vaults, the use of the vaulting board safety “collar” is mandatory and must be provided by
the competition organizer. For round-off entry vaults, the gymnast
may use one official handy-mat provided only by the organizer.
5.	Vaults with saltos during the first flight phase and vaults with
straddled legs are neither listed nor permitted.
6.	The gymnast must show the intended body position (tucked, piked,
or stretched) in a distinct and unmistakable manner. Indistinct body
positions are deducted by the E-Jury and may result in recognition
as a lower value vault by the D-Jury.
7.	Basis for the Evaluation by the E-Jury:
a)	First flight phase, up to the support with two hands.
b)	2nd flight phase, including the pushing off from the table up
to the landing in a standing position. The gymnast must demonstrate a distinct rise in the height of his body after push off
from the table.
c)	Body position in the momentary support on the table.
d)	Deductions with regard to the deviation from the extended axis
of the table.
e)	Technical execution during the entire vault.
f)	 The landing.
8.	Landing Rules:
a)	The gymnast must land with both feet within an area marked
left and right of the extended centre line of the table as described in the following draw.
	 These lines must be clearly marked on the landing mat. Stepping on the line, but not over the line, is permitted.
	 The mat containing the marked landing zone for alignment
must be securely fastened so that it cannot shift during competition.
b)	Twisting during vaults must be completed before landing.
Incomplete twists result in the appropriate deduction, and if
incomplete by 90° or more, will result in non-recognition by
the D-jury and in recognition as a vault with a lower Difficulty
Value.
9.	In the 2nd flight phase, the gymnast must show a conspicuous rise
in height of his center of gravity at the moment of hand push-off.
10. Salto vaults tucked or piked must display a distinct opening phase
in preparation for landing. A landing that is not prepared is a sign of
an error in technique and will usually result in a technical execution
deduction as well as a landing deduction.
11. For a full list of errors and deductions governing Exercise Presentation see, Section 9 and the summary of deductions in Articles
9.4 and 13.3.

Article 13.2.2 Information about the D score
1.	The gymnast must show one vault in Qualification, Team Final
and the All-Around Final. In the Qualification for Vault Final and in
Vault Finals he must show two vaults, which must be from different

Vault Groups (for all vaults) and which may not have the same or
similar 2nd flight phases (for the higher difficulty vaults).
Group I	
Group II	
Group III	
Group IV	
Group V	

Handspring .
1/4 or 1/2 tw in 1st flight.
Round off entry.
Round off with 1/2 tw in 1st flight.
Scherbo entry in 1st flight

2.	Each vault is listed, numbered, and given a value in the Difficulty
Tables within its Group. The following general principles apply:
a)	Cuervo vaults have the same value as equivalent Handspring
Salto vaults with twists.
b)	Kasamatsu vaults have the same value as the equivalent
Tsukahara vaults.
c)	Yurchenko vaults have the same value as the analogous
Tsukahara or Kasamatsu vaults.
d)	Unless otherwise indicated, round-off entry vaults with ½ turn
to the table have a value of 0.20 more than the analogous
forward approach vaults.
e)	Unless otherwise indicated, round-off entry vaults with ¾ or 1/1
turn to the table have a value of 0.60 more than the analogous
Tsukahara vaults.
3.	Each vault is given a unique Difficulty Value based on its complexity.
4.	Prior to the execution of each vault, the appropriate vault number,
as assigned in the Code of Points must be displayed for the D-jury.
This function is performed by the gymnast, or an assistant, with
the aid of a flashboard and is not penalized in the case of error.
Example: #319 - The #3 designates the vault group; the
#19 designates the vault number within that vault group.
5.	The gymnast must show the intended body position (tucked, piked,
or stretched) in a distinct and unmistakable manner. Non-distinct
body positions may result in non-recognition by the D-Jury or
recognition as a vault with a lower Difficulty Value. (see the body
position definitions in Appendix A Section 3). The gymnast must
display the vault number for the vault that he can do, not the one
he hopes to do. This warning applies especially for the recognition
of stretched and piked positions.
6.	The placement mat may be used for roundoff entry vaults only,
and is optional.
7.	The vault is invalid (0.00 point from the D-Jury and the E-Jury)) when:
a)	The vault is executed without a support phase, i.e., neither
hand touches the table.
b)	Failure to use the safety collar for round-off entry vaults.
c)	The vault is so poorly executed that the intended vault cannot
be recognized, or the gymnast pushes from the table with his/
her feet.
d)	Spotting assistance during the vault.
e)	The gymnast does not land with his feet first. This means that
at least one foot must contact the landing mat before any other
part of the body.
f)	 The gymnast lands intentionally in a side stand.
g)	The gymnast performs a prohibited vault (straddled legs, salto
in first flight, prohibited pre-element before the vaulting board,
etc.).
h) The first vault is repeated for the second vault in Qualification
for Vault Final or in Vault Final.
A video review by D- panel and Apparatus supervisor will automatically occur for every vault receiving an Invalid “0 “Score.
All E-Jury judges enter their deductions after every vault performed. The D jury will notify them in the case of a “0” vault and
advise them of the method to present a “0” E-score.
7.	In Qualification, Team Final, and All-Around Final:
	 • One vault must be performed.
	 • In Qualification, the 1st vault score counts toward the Team and/
or All-Around Total.
	 For Qualification and in the Apparatus Final, each gymnast must
perform two different vaults which must be from different Vault Groups
(for pages 1 & 2 of Vault Value Table) and which may not have the same
or similar 2nd flight phases (for page 2 of the Vault Value Table only).
	 In Qualification and in the Apparatus Final, the average score
of the 2 vaults will determine the final score for the gymnast.
8.	Additional run approaches are permitted as follows, with deduction
of 1.00 for empty run (if gymnasts has not touched the springboard
or apparatus).
-	 When 1 vault is required, a second run approach is permitted
with deduction. Third approach not permitted.
-	 When 2 vaults are required, a third run approach is permitted
with deduction. Fourth approach not permitted.

Article 13.3 Table of Specific Errors and Deductions for Vault
D jury
Small
0.10

Error
Landing or touching with one foot
or one hand outside the landing
area.

Landing directly outside the landing
area.

Exceeding 25 meter run for Vault.

Illegal or invalid vaults.
Failure to use vault board safety
collar for round-off entry vaults.

Large
0.50

0,50 from the Final Score

Score of 0,00 for the vault

Score of 0,00 for the vault

Repeating 1st vault in Qualification
or in Vault-Final.

Score of 0,00 for the vault

Repeating 1st vault group in Qualification or in Vault-Final.

2,0 point deduction for the 2nd vault

2,0 point deduction for the 2nd vault

Additional run approach.

1,00 point deduction

E Jury deductions

0.3 from the final score

0.3 from the final score

Same or similar 2nd flight phase
for the two vaults in Qualification or
in Vault-Final (Table page 2).

0.1 from the final score

Touching with feet, hands, foot and
hand or with any other part of the
body outside of the landing area.

Medium
0.30

Small
0.10

Medium
0.30

Large
0.50

Insufficient height, no conspicuous
rise of the body.

Lack of extension in preparation
for landing.

Error
Execution errors in 1st flight.
Technical errors in 1st flight.
Passing the handstand position not
through the vertical.
Execution errors in 2nd flight.
Technical errors in 2nd flight.

FIG MAG VAULT VALUE TABLE
EG2

EG1

EG3
Handspring
EG5

EG4
Round off entry
Scherbo entry in 1st flight
Round off w/ ½ tw in 1st flight
Handspring.
Paloma.
Handspring sideways ¼ tw.
Round off back handspring
Round off ½ tw handspring
Scherbo entry to back handspring
Handspring ½ tw.
Handspring sideways 3/4 tw
Round off back handspring ½ tw
Round off ½ tw handspring ½ tw
Scherbo entry to back handspring ½ tw
Handspring 1/1 tw.
Handspring sideways 5/4 tw
Round off back handspring 1/1 tw
Round off ½ tw handspring 1/1 tw
Scherbo entry to back handspring 1/1 tw
Handspring 3/2 tw.
Handspring sideways ¼ tw salto forward tucked
Round off back handspring salto bwd tucked (Yurchenko)
Round off ½ tw handspring salto forward tucked.
Scherbo entry to salto backward tucked
Handspring 2/1 tw.
Handspring sideways ¼ tw salto forward piked
Yurchenko tucked ½ tw
Round off ½ tw handspring salto forward tucked ½ tw
Scherbo entry & to salto backward piked
Handspring 5/2 tw. (Tsygankov)
Handspring sideways ¼ tw salto bwd tucked (Tsukahara)
Yurchenko tucked 1/1 tw
Round off ½ tw handspring salto forward piked.
Scherbo entry & to salto backward tucked ½ tw
Handspring salto forward tucked.
Tsukahara piked
Yurchenko tucked 3/2 tw
Round off ½ tw handspring salto fwd piked ½ tw (Nemov)
Scherbo entry & salto backward tucked 1/1 tw
Handspring salto forward tucked ½ tw. (Cuervo tucked)
Tsukahara tucked ½ tw
Yurchenko tucked 2/1 tw
Scherbo entry & to salto backward tucked 3/2 tw
Handspring salto fwd tucked 1/1 tw. (Cuervo tucked ½ tw)
Handspring sideways ¼ tw salto fwd tucked ½ tw (Kasamatsu)
Yurchenko piked
Handspring salto fwd t. 3/2 tw (Kroll) or Cuervo t 1/1 tw.
Paloma mortal agr. con 3/2 g. (Kroll) o Cuervo agr. 1/1 g.
Kasamatsu tucked ½ tw or Tsukahara tucked 3/2 tw
Handspring salto fwd t. 2/1 tw (Canbas) (Cuervo t 3/2 tw)
Paloma mortal agr. con 2/1 g. (Canbas) (Cuervo 3/2 g.)
Tsukahara t. 2/1 tw (Barbieri) or Kasamatsu 1/1 tucked
Handspring salto forward piked
Handspring salto forward piked ½ tw (Cuervo piked)
Handspring salto fwd. piked 1/1 tw. (Cuervo piked ½ tw)
Handspring salto fwd. piked 3/2 tw. (Cuervo piked 1/1 tw.)
Handspring w 1/1 tw to salto forward tucked (Behrend)
Handspring w 1/1 tw to salto forward piked (Rehm)
Handspring w. 1/1 tw. to salto fwd. piked ½ tw. (Arican)
¼ or ½ tw in 1st flight
Handspring
Handspring salto forward stretched.
Handspring salto fwd. str. ½ tw. (Cuervo str.)
Handspring salto fwd. str. 1/1 tw. (Cuervo str ½ tw.)
Hdst. salto fwd. str. 3/2 tw. (Cuervo str 1/1 tw.) (Lou Yun)
Handspring salto fwd. str. 2/1 tw. (Cuervo str 3/2 tw).
Handspring salto fwd. str. 5/2 tw. (Yeo 2)
Handspring salto fwd. str. 3/1 tw. (Yang Hak Seon)
Handspring double salto fwd. tucked (Roche)
Roche ½ tw. (Dragulescu)
Tsukahara str.
Hdast sideways ¼ tw salto fwd. str or Tsukahara str. ½ tw.
Kasamatsu str. or Tsukahara str. 1/1 tw.
Kasamatsu str. ½ tw or Tsukahara str. 3/2 tw
Kasamatsu str. 1/1 tw. or Tsukahara str. 2/1 tw. (Akopian)
Kasamatsu str. 3/2 tw. (Driggs)
Kasamatsu str. 2/1 tw. (Lopez)
Kasamatsu str. 5/2 tw.
Kasamatsu ext. 5/2 g.
Round off entry
Scherbo entry in 1st flight
Round off w/ ½ tw in 1st flight
Yurchenko str.
Yurchenko str. ½ tw.
Yurchenko str. 1/1 tw.
Yurchenko str. 3/2 tw.
Yurchenko str. 2/1 tw.
Yurchenko str. 5/2 tw. (Shewfelt)
Yurchenko str. 3/1 tw. (Shirai - Kim Hee Hoon)
Round off ½ tw handspring salto fwd str.
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. stretched (Scherbo)
Scherbo ½ tw.
Scherbo 1/1 tw.
Scherbo 3/2 tw.
Scherbo 2/1 tw.
Scherbo 5/2 tw.
Round off ½ tw. handspring salto fwd. str. ½ tw. (Hutcheon)
Round off ½ tw. handspring salto fwd. str. 1/1 tw.
Round off ½ tw. handspring salto fwd. str. 3/2 tw.
Round off ½ tw. handspring salto fwd. str, 2/1 tw.
Round off ½ tw. hdst. salto fwd. str 5/2 tw (Li Xiao Peng)
Round off ½ tw. hdst. double salto fwd. tucked
Tsukahara with salto bwd tucked (Yeo)
Tsukahara with salto bwd. piked (Lu Yu Fu)
Double Tsukahara tucked 1/1 tw. (Ri Se Gwang)
Yurchenko and salto bwd. tucked (Melissanidis)
Yurchenko and salto bwd. piked (Melissanidis piked)
Handspring salto fwd. ½ tw to salto bwd. (Zimmerman)
Handspring double salto fwd. piked (Blanik)
Hdst. double salto fwd. piked ½ tw. (RI Se Gwang 2)

This page also shows vaults with same or similar 2nd flight phase, denoted with the same last two digits in the vault number and
Key number in the table boxes. The vaults with a potential deduction of -2.0 for qualification to and in the apparatus final are
located in the same row of this table.
KEY
Same 2nd Flight Phase
Same 2nd Flight Phase
Similar 2nd Flight Phase
Gymnasts may not do vaults with the same or similar 2nd
flight phase.

XXXX

EG I: Forward Handspring style vaults
Forward handspring.
Forward handspring with ½ t.
Forward handspring with 1/1 t.
Handspring fwd. and salto fwd. t.
	 Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. t. w. ½ t. (or Cuervo t.).
Handspring fwd. and salto fwd. piked.
w. ½ t.).
t. w. 1/1 t.).
t. w. 3/2 t.).
Forward handspring with 3/2 t.
	 Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. p. w. ½ t. (Cuervo p.).
	 Hdspr. fwd. w. 1/1 t. a. salto fwd. t.
Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. p. w. 1/1 t. (Cuervo 	 Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. p. w. 3/2 t. (Cuervo
p. w. ½ t.).
p. w. 1/1 t.).
Forward handspring with 2/1 t.
Forward handspring with 5/2 t.
	 Hdspr. fwd. w. 1/1 t. and salto fwd. p.
Hdspr. fwd. 1/1 t. and Salto fwd piked ½ t.
	 Handspring fwd. and salto fwd. str.
	 Handspring fwd. and salto fwd. str. w. 5/2 t.
Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. str. w. ½ t. (Cuervo str.). 
Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. str. w. 1/1 t. (Cuervo str. ½ t.).
Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. str. w. 3/2 t. (Cuervo str. w. 1/1 t.).
Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. str. w. 2/1 t. (Cuervo str. 3/2 t.).
	 Handspring fwd. and salto fwd. str. w. 3/1 t.
	 Handspring fwd. and dbl. salto fwd. t.
	 Roche with ½ turn.
Handspring fwd. and salto fwd. t. w. ½ t. and 	
Handspring fwd. and dbl. salto fwd. piked.
Dragulescu piked.
salto bwd. t.
EG II: Handspring with ¼ or ½ turn in the 1st flight phase
Handspring sw. with ¼ t.
Handspring sw. with 3/4 t.
Handspring sw. with 5/4 t.
Hdspr. sw. with. ¼ t. a. salto fwd. t.
Handspring sw. w. ¼ t. a. salto fwd. p.
	 Handspring sw. w. ¼ t. a. salto bwd. t.
	 Tsukahara piked.
	 Tsukahara t. with ½ t.
	 Tsukahara t. with 2/1 t.
	 Hdspr. sw. w. ¼ t. a. salto fwd. t. w. ½ t. or Tsuk. t. w. 1/1 t. 	 Tsukahara t. w. 3/2 t.or Kasamatsu t. ½ t
Tsukahara stretched.
Tsukahara str. with ½ t. or Hdspr. sw ¼ t. salto 	
Tsukahara str. w. 1/1 t. or Kasamatsu str.
fwd str.
Kasamatsu str. with 2/1 t.
Kasamatsu str. with 5/2 t. or Tsukahara st. with 7/2 t.
Kasamatsu str. w. 1/1 t. or Tsukahara str. w. 2/1 t. 	
Kasamatsu str. with 3/2 t.
Kasamatsu str. with ½ t. or Tsukahara str. w. 3/2 t. 	
Tsukahara with salto bwd. t.
	 Tsukahara with salto bwd. piked.
Double Tsukahara with 1/1 twist.

EG III: Round off entry vaults also ¼ t. with bwd. 2nd. flight phase
Round off, handspring bwd.
Round off, handspring bwd. with ½ turn.
Round off, handspring bwd. with 1/1 turn.
Round off, hdspr. bwd. and salto bwd. t.
Yurchenko t. with ½ t.
Yurchenko t. with 1/1 t.
Yurchenko t. with 3/2 t.
Yurchenko t. with 2/1 t.
Yurchenko piked.
Yurchenko stretched.
Yurchenko stretched with ½ t.
Yurchenko stretched with 1/1 t.
Yurchenko stretched with 3/2 t.
Yurchenko stretched with 2/1 t.
Yurchenko stretched with 5/2 t.
Yurchenko Stretched 3/1 t.
Yurchenko and salto bwd. t.
Melissanidis piked.

EG IV: Round off entry vaults with ½ t. in the 1st. flight phase
Round off, ½ t. and handspring fwd.
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. with ½ t.
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. with 1/1 t.
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. p. with ½ t.
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. 	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. 	
Round off, ½ t. a. hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. p. tucked.
tucked with ½ t.
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. str. with 1/1 t.
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. str.	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. str. with ½ t.
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. 	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. 	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd.
stretched with 2/1 t.
stretched with 3/2 t.
str. with 5/2 t.
Round off, ½ t. a. hdspr. fwd. and double salto fwd. tucked.

EG V: Scherbo entry in 1st flight
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. tucked.
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. tucked with ½ turn.
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. piked.
Scherbo entry to back handspring.
Scherbo entry to back handspring with ½ turn.
Scherbo entry to back handspring with 1/1 turn.
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. tucked with 3/2 turn.
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. tucked with 1/1 turn.
Scherbo with 1/1 t.
Scherbo with 3/2 t.
Scherbo with 2/1 t.
Scherbo with ½ t.
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. stretched.
Scherbo with 5/2 t.

Section 14: Parallel Bars

Height: 180 cm from top of mat, 200 cm from floor.

Article 14.1 Exercise Description
A contemporary parallel bar exercise consists predominantly of swing
and flight elements selected from all available Element Groups and
performed with continuous transitions through various hang and
support positions in such a way as to reflect the full potential of the
apparatus.

Article 14.2 Content and Construction

Article 14.2.1 Information about Exercise Presentation
1. The gymnast must initiate his Parallel Bar mount or his run-up
from a still stand with legs together. The exercise begins the moment the feet leave the ground. Swinging with one leg or stepping
into the mount is not permitted. The feet must leave the ground
simultaneously.
2.	A vaulting board placed at the height of the regulation landing mats
is permitted for the mount.
3.	Pre-elements are not permitted. This means that any element that
rotates more than 180º around any body axis may not be performed
prior to grasping the rail or rails with the hands.
4. The gymnast must include only elements that he can perform
with complete safety and a high degree of aesthetic and technical mastery.
5. Additional execution and exercise construction expectations are:

a)	Back swings in support or upper arm hang that do not lead to at
least a value part but simply reverse direction and swing back
down in or to a lower hang or support position are deducted,
i.e:
•	 Back swing in upper arm hang, layaway to glide kip.
•	 Back swing in support, layaway to front uprise.
•	 Back swing in support, layaway to hang.
•	 Glide kip to upper arm hang or to momentary support and
lay back to upper arm hang.
•	 From handstand, lower to shoulder roll forward.

b)	No extra support is allowed during elements with turns on
one arm support. Elements such as giant swing with turn,
backward uprise with turn, forward uprise with full turn, Felge
elements with turn, etc. will be considered finished where the
extra support occurs.
c)	All elements in hang followed by kips must be executed with
straight legs.
d)	The following elements or groups of elements are not permitted:
•	 Strength and hold elements that are not listed in the difficulty tables.
•	 Saltos and dismounts from side hang on one bar.
•	 Saltos with reception in upper arms and/or bent arms
support for juniors.
e)	Elements performed to one bar (Chiarlo, Piasecky, etc..) must
be executed to a handstand with hands slightly apart. A slight
deviation of the shoulders/body is permitted because of the
unnatural hand position. Deductions will be taken for excessive
hand separation and/or body deviation.
f)	 On all Moy and Giant Bwd. swings, legs may not bend until
body is horizontal.
g)	The deduction for lack of extension before regrasping after
saltos means the extension (opening) should be at horizontal
(bar height).
6. For a full list of errors and deductions governing Exercise Presentation, see Section 8 and the summary of deductions in Article 14.3.

Article 14.2.2 Information about the “D score”
1.	The Element Groups (EG) are:
I.	 Elements in support or through support on 2 bars.
II. 	Elements starting in upper arm position.
III. 	Long swings in hang on 1 or 2 bars and underswings.
IV. 	Dismounts.
2. Information on difficulty value:
a)	For elements which include turns, the turns are not recognized
as part of the element if the turn happens after the handstand
position or after a hop to handstand. Examples: basket with
inlocation and hop to handstand with turn or giant swing half
turn with hop to handstand followed by turns.
b)	Unless otherwise indicated, elements that deliberately re-grasp
in bent arm support are considered to have the same identification number and value as elements which re-grasp in upper
arm support. However, elements that are initiated from bent
arm support are considered to have the same identification
number and value as elements from or through support.
c)	Unless otherwise indicated in the difficulty tables, elements
performed from or to unusual or rotated grip positions (supinated or pronated) have the same identification number and
value as analogous elements performed from or to the usual
grip position.
d)	Elements formed by combined independent elements must
demonstrate no pause between elements, or they will receive
their independent values.
e)	In the Qualifications or Team Finals, for preparation of the
Parallel Bars prior to an exercise (during the one-touch warmup and competition), any FOP accredited person from the
federation of the gymnasts may assist. In the All-Around or
Apparatus Finals, a maximum of three people (the competing
gymnast, coach, and 1 other FOP accredited person may be
on the podium to prepare the bars.
3.	Additional information and regulations:
a)	Many swinging elements lead to or are defined to a handstand
on one or two rails. The handstands from swing need not be
held but the element must be performed in a manner that
convincingly demonstrates that the handstand position could
have been held if so desired.
b)	Special rule: Elements to one bar in cross support have the
same value as done to two bars, except they increase by one
value more when connected to Healy type elements (each
Healy element also increases by one value)- hold is allowed
in the one bar handstand.
c)	 Elements to one bar upgrade the value if is connected to healy
type elements, but only if the healy element is executed without
large deduction.
d)	No straddle element to one bar can receive an increase in
difficulty value, i.e. Tippelt, Arican, etc.
e)	How to evaluate Makuts type elements with a pause or stop
during the first part of the element:

Performance

Jury D

Jury E

Performance

D-jury

E-jury

Pause after first part
of element

Give value

-0.1 for Pausing or
Stopping in Handstand

One second hold
after first part of
element (less than 2
seconds)

Give value

-0.3 for Pausing or
Stopping in Handstand

Two second hold
after first part of
element

No value

-0.5 for Pausing or
Stopping in Handstand

	 For example: Makuts to handstand with less than a one second
hold after the ¾ Diamidov and then ¾ Healy = E value and
-0.1 for Pausing or Stopping in handstand.
f)	 All Healys must have 360° or more turns to be recognized as
a Healy type element.
	 i.e. From a swing element (minimum B value) to handstand
on one bar sideways, requires a Healy (450° turn) to support
for an E value.
	 Note: A ¾ Healy, from sideways position, is a B value and
same box as Element I.44.
4.	Special repetitions:
a)	Elements with saltos: an exercise can not include more than
one variation of the same element (within the same EG). In
this case the element with the highest difficulty value will be
counted for difficulty.
Some examples:
- 	Morisue tuck or Morisue pike.
- 	Belle tuck or Belle pike.
- 	5/4 Salto fwd straddled to up. arm hang or to bent arm
support or through support to hang/directly to hang.
b)	Maximum two Giant Swings to handstand (III. 21, 22, 28, 29
& 35).
c)	 Maximum two Basket Swings to handstand (III. 106, 107, 114,
119, 120, 130,136).
5. For a further list of regulations governing non-recognition of elements and other aspects of the D score, see Section 9 and the
summary of deductions in Articles 9.4 and 14.3.

Article 14.3 Specific Deductions for Parallel Bars

Not controlled momentary
handstand positions on 1
or 2 rails.

Lack of extension at
horizontal regrasping after
saltos.

Medium
0.30

0.30 from the Final Score (D1 Judge) for
individual competition or 1.00 from team
score for team competition.

each time

Uncontrolled regrasping
after saltos.
Non respect of the official
warm up time (50’’).

Large
0.50

Pre-element.
Stepping or hands adjustments in handstand.

Small
0.10

Layaway on the back swing.

Error
One leg step or swing on
mount.

EG I: Elements in support or through support on 2 bars
	 Any handstand on 1 or 2 rails (2 s.).
	 Bent arm swing fwd. to hop ½ t. to sup.
	 Stützkehr fwd. to hdst.(to 1 or 2 bars).
	 Any L-sit on 1 or 2 rails (2 s.).
	 Swing fwd. w. 1/1 t. to up. arm hang.
	 Straddle cut bwd. to hdst.
	 Diamidov and ½ turn to upper arms.
	 Straddle cut fwd. to support or L-sit (2 s.).
	 Straddle cut bwd. to support.
	 Stützkehr fwd. or salto bwd. to hdst. sideways on
1 rail (also with additional ¼ or ¾ turn to hdst.).
	 ¾ Diamidov and rear vault to side hang on 1 bar.
	 Diamidov with ¼ or ½ t. to hdst.
	 Strad. cut bwd. and salto fwd. to up. arm hang. 	 Swing fwd. w. 1/1 t. on 1 arm to hdst.
¾ Diamidov & ¾ Healy on the other hand to supp.
Any press w. bent arm str. body, or str. arm bent 	
Makuts to upper arm hang or ¾ Diamidov ¼ 	 Swing forward with 5/4 t. on one arm through- 	
¾ Diamidov y ¾ Healy en la otra mano al apoyo. 	
Swing forward with 5/4 t. on one arm through
body to hdst., on 1 or 2 rails (2 s.) also straddled.
Healy to support.
hdst. and healy to up. arm.
hdst. and healy to support.
	 Swing fwd. to hdst., hop to support.
	 Salto bwd to handstand. Also to one rail.
	 Salto bwd to handstand 1 rail (connected to
Healy type element).
	 Salto bwd. with ½ t. to up. arm hang.
	 Double salto t. to up. arm hang.
	 Double salto p. to up. arm hang.
	 Hdst. with ¼ t. and fall back to sup. with ¼ t.
	 Hdst. with ¾ t. and fall back to sup. with ¼ t.
	 3/2 salto bwd. with ½ t. to up. arm hang.
	 Stützkehr bwd. with straddle cut bwd. to sup.
Stützkehr bwd. to support.
Stützkehr bwd. through hdst. to support.
	 Healy to upper arm hang.
	 From hdst. on 1 rail, Healy to upper arm hang. 	 Healy to support (also from hdst. on 1 rail).
Following a swing element (min. B) to hdst on
1 rail, Healy (360° or more) to support.
Min. B
Swing bwd. with ½ t. hop to hdst.
Swing bwd. with ¾ t. hop to hdst.
versé.
Swing bwd. with 1/1 t. hop to hdst.
Gatson 1 with ¼ t to hdst. on 1 rail and ¼ t.
hdst. on 2 rails.
Any 1/1 pirouette in hdst. on 2 rails.
	 Any hdst. with ½ turn fwd. (also with 2 s.).
	 ½ turn bwd. in handstand (also with 2 s.).
From hdst. on 1 rail, ½ or ¾ pir. fwd. or bwd. in
hdst.
	 From hdst., salto fwd to support or from hdsd.
with rotated grip, inlocate to support.
	 5/4 salto fwd. strad. through support to hang or
directly to hang.
5/4 salto fwd. t. or p. to upper arm hang.
Salto fwd to support.
5/4 salto fwd. straddled to up. arm hang.
Double salto fwd. t. to up. arm hang.
Double salto fwd. p. to up. arm hang.
Salto fwd. t. or p. with ¼ t. to hang on 1 rail. 	
Salto fwd. t. or p. to hang at the end of the bars. 	
5/4 salto forward str. to upper arm hang
On end, 1 circle or flair.
In center or on end facing out, 1 circle or flair. 	
On end, Russian wende swing (360°).
5/4 salto fwd. strad. to bent arm sup.
Salto fwd. with 1/1 t. to up. arm hang.
Any flair to hdst.
Any flair with ½ t. to hdst.

EG II: Elements starting in upper arm position
	 Fwd. uprise and straddle cut bwd to handstand.
	 Fwd. uprise with ¼ t. to hang on 1 rail.
	 Roll bwd. with ½ t. from up. arm. hang or Fwd.
uprise to Kato hop to sup.
	 Fwd. uprise with ½ t. to handstand.
	 Fwd. uprise to Makuts to support.
	 Fwd. uprise to Makuts to upper arm.
	 Roll bwd to handstand with straight arms.
	 Fwd. uprise with 3/2 t. to handstand.
	 Fwd. uprise with 1/1 t. to handstand.
	 Roll bwd. with strad. cut to support.
	 Salto bwd. with strad. cut to up. arm hang.
	 Roll bwd with salto bwd tuck to upper arm hang. 	 Roll bwd with salto bwd piked to upper arm hang.
	 Bwd. uprise to handstand (or w. ½ t).
Bwd. uprise with ½ t. hop to handstand.
Bwd. uprise with ¾ t. hop to hdst. on 1 rail.
Bwd. uprise with ½ t. and straddle cut bwd to 	
Bwd. uprise with ½ t. a. strad. cut bwd. to sup.
upper arm hang.
	 Bwd. uprise with ½ t. to support.
	 Roll bwd. with ½ t. tuck to upper arm hang.
	 Roll bwd. with ½ t. tuck to hang.
	 Bwd. uprise and salto fwd. p. to sup.
	 Bwd. uprise and 5/4 salto fwd. t., p. or strad. to
Bwd. uprise and double salto fwd. t. to up arm
up.arm hang.
hang.
	 Bwd. uprise and 5/4 salto fwd. straddled to up.
arm hang.
	 Bwd. uprise and strad. cut or flank over to sup. 	 Bwd. uprise and strad. cut or flank over to sup.
bent arm.
str. arm.

EG III: Long swings in hang en 1 or 2 bars and Underswings

	 Swing forward, straddle cut backward, and
regrasp with straight body at horizontal.
	 Swing forward, straddle cut backward, and regrasp 	 Moy piked with straddle bwd to hdst.
with straight body at horizontal to bent and upper arm.
	 Moy piked with stradd. cut bwd. and ½ t. to up.
arm hang (also legs together).
	 Moy and salto fwd. t., p. or strad. to upper arm
hang.
	 Moy to support bent legs (also without grip 	 Moy to support str. legs (also without grip
release).
release).
	 Giant swing bwd. to hdst. or with inlocation fwd. 	 Giant swing bwd. to hdst. on one rail (connected to
(also with ¼ or ½ turn and to one rail).	
Healy type element).
	 Giant swing bwd. with ½ t. to up. arm hang.
	 Giant swing bwd. with ½ t. to support.
	 Swing down with salto bwd. str. to hang.
	 Giant swg. Diamidov with ¼ or ½ t. to hdst.
	 Giant swg. bwd. with Diamidov to hdst., also to 
one rail.
	 Giant swg. bwd. with Diamidov to hdst. one rail 	 Belle con 1/1 giro.
(connected to Healy type element).
	 Giant swing bwd. with Makuts to upper hang.
	 Giant swing bwd. w. strad. cut to up. arm hang.
	 Giant swing bwd. with straddle cut to support or 	
Giant swing bwd. with ½ t. and str. cut bwd. to
bent arms support.
up. arms.
	 Belle piked.
	 Fr. giant. sw. bwd., dbl. salto t. to up. arm hang.
	 Giant swing bwd. and salto with ½ t to hang on 	 Giant swing bwd. and salto with ½ t or p. to up. 	
Giant swing bwd. and salto with ½ t or p. to 	 Giant swing bwd. with ½ t. and 3/2 salto fwd to up
the end.
arm hang or hang.
support.
arm hang.
	 Glide kip one or two rails.
	 Glide kip. with 1/2 t. to support.
	 Glide kip bwd. to hdst.
	 Glide kip to strad. cut bwd. hdst. on 1 or 2 r.
Giant swing bwd. and salto with ½ str to up.
arm hang.
	 Glide kip through L-sit p. to hdst.
	 Glide kip one rail through L-sit strad. to hdst. 
	 Glide kip through L-sit p.to hdst. and hop with
3/4 t or more.
salto.
	 Glide kip through V-sit and hop ½ turn to hang
on other rail.
Cast to upper arm hang.
Cast to support.
Felge with ½ t. to upper arm hang.
Felge with ½ t. to rear support.
Cast with ½ t. to up. arm hang.
Cast with ½ t. to support.
Basket to handstand or with inlocation (el-grip) 	
Basket with ¼, ¾ or ½ t. to handstand.
and hop to hdst. Also to one rail.
Basket with 1/1 t. to handstand.
Cast to straddle cut backward to handstand.
Basket with 5/4 t. to handstand.
Basket to support
Basket with travel to hang
Basket with immed. straddle cut to support.
Basket to one rail hdst. (connected to Healy type element).
Basket through handstand to Makuts.
Basket forward to support.
Basket forward with ½ t. to support.
Basket with salto bwd t. to up. arm hang.
Shoot up to hdst. and hop to other rail.
Shoot up with ¼ t. to hdst.
Straddled shoot to hdst on 1 rail.

EG IV: Dismounts
	 Salto fwd. piked or stretched.
	 Salto fwd. piked or str. with ½ t.
	 Salto fwd. piked or str. with 1/1 or 3/2 t.
	 Salto fwd. piked or str. with 2/1 or 5/2 t.
	 Double salto fwd. t.
	 Double salto fwd. piked.
	 Double salto fwd. t. from end.
	 Double salto fwd. t. w. ½ t. or ½ t. doub. salt. bwd.
	 Double salto fwd. piked with ½ t.
	 Salto bwd. piked or str.
	 Salto bwd. piked or str. with ½ t.
	 Salto bwd. piked or str. with 1/1 or 3/2 t.
	 Salto bwd. str. with 2/1 t.
	 Double salto fwd. tucked with 1/1 t.
	 Double salto bwd. t.
	 Double salto bwd. t. from end.
	 High wende and salto bwd t.or p.
	 Double salto bwd. pike.
	 Double salto bwd. t. with 1/1 t.
	 Double salto bwd. t. with ½ t. or salto bwd. ½ t.
	 From hang on end, salto bwd. stretched.
	 From hang on end, double salto bwd. t.
	 From hang on end, dbl. salto bwd. piked.
	 From hang on end, dbl. salto bwd. t. with 1/1 or
	 From hang on end, dbl. salto bwd. t. with 2/1 t.

Section 15: Horizontal Bar

Height: 260 cm from top of mat, 280 cm from the floor.

Article 15.1 Exercise description
A contemporary Horizontal Bar Exercise must be a dynamic
presentation that consists entirely of the fluid connection of swinging,
turning, and flight elements alternating between elements performed
near to and far from the bar in a variety of hand grips so as to
demonstrate the full potential of the apparatus.

Article 15.2 Content and Construction

Article 15.2.1 Information about Exercise Presentation
1.	The gymnast must jump or be assisted to a still or swinging hang
on the Horizontal Bar from a still stand with legs together or from a
short run, but always with good form. The evaluation begins from
the moment the gymnast leaves the floor.
2.	The gymnast must include only elements that he can perform
with complete safety and a high degree of aesthetic and technical
mastery.
3.	Other execution and exercise construction expectations are:
a)	The exercise must consist entirely of swings without stops or pauses.
b)	Deviations in swings to or through handstand, including turns.

no deduction
- 0.1
- 0.3
- 0.5 and non-recognition (by the D jury)

	

0° - 15°	 = 	
16° - 30°	= 	
31° - 45°	= 	
>45°	
=	

Turning Elements finishing in mixed elgrip and double elgrip are
subject to the following deductions:
0° - 30°	 = 	 no deduction
31° - 45°	= 	 - 0.1
46° - 90°	= 	 - 0.3
>90°	
= 	 - 0.5 and non-recognition (by the D jury)
and non - recognition


c)	Flight elements must demonstrate a conspicuous rise of the
body during the flight phase.
d)	Backward swings to handstand that simply reverse direction
and swing back down in the reverse direction are deducted
(composition errors) each time with 0,30 points.
	 Specific examples of such layaways are:
•	 Following a kip cast or back uprise to handstand - layaway
to giant swing bwd., Stalder, free hip, ½ turn to el-grip, etc.
•	Following a backward uprise to handstand and hop to
overgrip - swing forward to giant swing bwd., Stalder, free
hip, etc.
(Also other angle deductions also need to be applied for
missing the handstand position).
e)	Any flight element with salto over the bar requires a giant swing
afterward or -0.3 (E-jury deduction).
f) For all Adler elements it is not required to enter from a handstand position.
4.	For a full list of errors and deductions governing Exercise Presentation, see Section 9 and the summary of deductions in Articles 9.4
and 15.3.

Article 15.2.2 Information about the D score
1.	The Element Groups are (EG):
I.	 Long hang swings with and without turns.
II. 	Flight elements.
III. 	In bar and Adler elements.
IV. 	Dismounts.
2.	Information about Connections (CV).
Connection points can be awarded only in the following situations:

Flight

Connection
points

Flight

C value


C or higher

or vice versa
D or higher value


D or higher value

=

0,10

=

0,20

Does not have to be inside the counting elements.
3.	Additional information and regulations:
a)	Unless otherwise indicated, the value and identification numbers of elements listed in the Difficulty Tables are the same if
performed from handstand, from a back swing, or from some
other position.
b)	Unless otherwise indicated, elements have the same difficulty
value and identification number when performed with the
“wrong grip” or atypical grip positions.
c)	Elements that end in a double elgrip have one letter superior
value than the same elements ending in one arm elgrip.
d)	Unless listed in the Difficulty Tables, elements with or from feet
on the bar are not permitted (exception: Piatti elements).
e)	Starting or re-grasping flight elements with one hand (or “wrong
grip”) has the same value and identification number as starting
or re-grasping with two hands.
f)	 Elements with turns must show the turns as an integral part
of the element being performed and the turn must be initiated
on the way up (exception Endo type elements).
g)	Elements with hops to handstand, which include turns, must
initiate the turn during the hop and must re-grasp with the
second hand only after the turn has been completed. A regrasp may occur initially with one hand and then the second
hand as the turn is completed. A hop element is considered
finished at the moment that both hands re-grasp the bar.
h)	El-grip elements meet only the requirements for the Element
Group in which they are listed.
I.	 Flight elements from el-grip are considered to belong to
Element Group II.
II.	 Dismounts from el-grip are considered to belong to Element Group IV.
III.	Endo swings in el-grip are considered to belong to Element Group III.
i)	 Expectation for Rybalko:
•	 Prerequisite condition for Rybalko is both hands in el-grip
in end position.
•	 Visible hop and fluid turn, not the turn on supporting arm.
j)	 Turning elements in one hand support position must be considered as finished at the moment the gymnast re-grasps the
bar with the second hand.
k)	Unless otherwise indicated, an element composed of two
separate elements will result in divided values when a grip
change occurs. (i.e. Endo in overgrip, change one hand to
undergrip, and 1/1 turn to el-grip = B+C).
4.	Unless otherwise indicated, for elements of Group I and III, the
following principles are used for the determination of difficulty:
a)	Value of the base element has been given a certain value.
•	A ½ turn does not increase the difficulty.
•	A 1/1 turn increases the difficulty by one letter.
•	A1/1 turn or greater to both el-grip increases the difficulty
by two letters.
•	A hop does not increase the difficulty.
•	Re-grasp in double el-grip increases the difficulty by one
letter.
b)	The element has the same value and identification number
whether it crosses the bar or not, as long as the amplitude
stipulations have been met.
5.	Flight elements from el-grip and dismounts from el-grip or dorsal
hang have the same value as elements performed in regular grip.
6.	Special repetitions:
a)	A maximum of two Stoop Circle Rearward forward through
handstand elements (Adler type) are permitted. In this case
the elements with the highest difficulty value will be counted.
b)	Elements with turns: an exercise cannot include more than
one grip variation of the same element. The second executed
one in chronological order is considered as repetition.
Examples:
•	 If a Rybalko in double el grip is executed, another Rybalko
in mixed grip or one hand grip is not permitted.
•	 If an Endo with 1/1 turn in mixed grip is executed, another
Endo with 1/1 turn in double el grip is not permitted.
•	 If a Stalder ½ turn in double el grip is executed, another
Stalder ½ turn in mixed grip is not permitted.
7.	Regrasping Tkatchev ½ or Yamawaki ½ elements without sufficient
turning and continuing to handstand (or directly connecting to a
release element) will receive the value for the identical element
listed in the code of points without a ½.
8.	For an el-grip or Russian giant to be recognized directly after an
Adler or turn to el-grip, the el-grip or Russian giant requires a swing
over the bar in el-grip in order to receive a value.
9.	A Zou Li Min executed with insufficient turning (greater than 90°
deviation on first full twist) will not be recognized by the D-jury
and receive a -0.5 deduction by the E-jury. This element may not
be devalued to a Giant Swing Fwd. with one arm in undergrip (B
value).
11. The Yamawaki element must be stretched when passing through
a vertical body position over the bar for no deductions. An excessive pike or a poor vertical position over the bar will be deducted
and could also lead to recognition of a B value flight element.
12. Yamawaki ½ will need to have all turning continue in the same
direction for the increase in letter value. If the element turns in two
different directions, the element will not be recognized by the D
jury. This element has the same twisting specification as all other
elements in the Code of Points.
13. Flight elements always receive value when two hands regrasp
the bar and a distinct hang phase is shown before the gymnast
falls. If the catch is performed with one arm, the value is given to
the gymnast when two hands have finally regrasped the bar or
another element has been clearly initiated.
14. A Rybalko to one arm with additional ½ or 1/1 turn. Numerous
variations of these elements have been proposed. The MTC will
not permit any additional turning in order to raise the value of
any Code of Points listed elements performed on one arm for the
safety of all gymnasts.
15. Giant swing bwd. with hop 3/2 t. to one arm giant swing (Rybalko
to one arm giant swing) is the same value and box as Rybalko to
undergrip or mixed el-grip (Element I.63).
	 Note: This rule also applies to all Stalder Rybalko type elements.
16. One arm giant swing fwd. w. 1/1 t. to el-grip and 1/1 t. to ugr. (Zou
Li Min, Element I.27) cannot be combined with any other element
for an increase in value.
17. Endo in el-grip thr. hdst. (Element IV.39): As long as the hands are
in el-grip during the entry of the legs, a hop out to undergrip, mixed
grip, or overgrip afterward is permitted without a loss of value.
18. How to determine evaluate el-grip combinations:
	 An El-grip giant swing (Element IV.14) and Giant swing rearways
fwd. (Russian giant, Element IV.15) only require going over the top
of the bar in el-grip to receive their listed value. No specific amount
of a giant swing in el-grip is required in order for the element to be
recognized.
	 Sequence examples:
1. Adler to 50° from handstand, swing in-elgrip through the bottom
and over the top, swing in elgrip through the bottom and hop
out to undergrip= No value for Adler (and -0.5 angle deduction)
and B value el-grip giant.
2. Adler to handstand, swing in el-grip through the bottom and over
the top into el-grip Endo, swing through the bottom in el-grip
Endo, and hop out to undergrip = C value Adler, B value el-grip
giant, C value el-grip Endo.
19. Flights elements with ½ turns to mixed el-grip must have more
than 50% of the turn completed upon catching the bar in order to
receive no deduction while continuing to back uprise to handstand.
E-jury deductions of small, medium, large should be applied for
any insufficient turning upon catching the bar.
20. Stoop circle fwd. to straddle cut to hang or sup. (Element II.1)Gymnast may enter at any angle from a giant swing or swing
forward.
21. For a further list of regulations governing non-recognition of elements and other aspects of the “D score”, see Section 7 and the
summary of deductions in Article 7.6.

Article 15.3 Specific Deductions for Horizontal Bar
Jury D

Passing through lower vertical
more than 2 times with one arm

and non-recognition by the D-jury

More than 2 times Stoop circle
rearward forward (Adler)

and non-recognition by the D-jury
Small
0.10

Legs apart or other poor
execution during jump or lift
to Horizontal Bar

Medium
0.30

Lack of swing or pause in
handstand or elsewhere

Low amplitude on flight
elements

≤ 15°

>15°

Deviation from plane of
movement

≤ 15°

>15°


Bent arms on regrasping
following flight elements

Bent knees during swing
actions

each time

Elements not continuing in
their intended direction (applied after element) Needed
to show the element can
receive value

Any flight element with salto
over the bar without a giant
swing afterward

Illegal elements with or from
feet on the bar

Layaway on the back swing

Large
0.50

EG I: Long hang swings and turns
	 Back uprise to handstand.
	 Back uprise to hdst. with 1/1 turn also to mixt.
	 Giant swing fwd. with 1/1 turn in double elgrip.	
Flying giant swing fwd. with 1/1 t.
	 Back uprise to handstand with ½ turn.
	 Swing bwd. and pirouette to hang.
	 Swing bwd. and pirouette to support.
Giant swing fwd.
Giant swing fwd. with 1/1 turn in mixt grip.
Giant swing fwd. with ½ t. thr. hdst.
Flying giant swing fwd. or with ½ turn.
Giant swing fwd. with one arm in ungr. (360°).
On one arm, giant swing fwd. w. 1/1 t. to el-grip
and 1/1 t. to ugr.
	 Giant swing bwd.
	 One arm giant swing bwd. (360°).
Giant swing bwd. with ½ turn.
Giant swing bwd. with hop to undergrip.
Flying giant swing bwd.
Flying giant swing bwd. with 1/1 t.
Flying giant swing bwd. with 2/1 t.
Giant swing bwd. with hop ½ t. to el-grip.
Giant swing bwd. with hop 3/2 t. to double el- grip.
Giant swing bwd. with hop 3/2 t. to undergrip, 	
mixed el-grip.
	 Giant swing bwd. with ½ t. to el-grip.
	 Long swing fwd. with hop to el-grip.
El-grip giant swing.
Giant swing rearways fwd. (Russian giant).
Giant swing rw. bwd. (Czech giant swing).
	 Elgrip giant swg. with 1/1 t. thr. hdst. in mx. gr.
Steineman uprise w. ½ t. to support.
Giant swing rw. bwd. (Czech giant swing) with
Giant swing bwd. with inlocation during swing 	
½ turn to fwd giant swing.
and dislocate to hdst.

EG II: Flight elements
	 Markelov stretched with legs together.
	 Back uprise and straddle over to hang rw.
	 Back uprise and strad. hecht with ½ t. to hang.
	 Swing fwd. and vault bwd. strad. or piked to hang. 	 Tkatchev stretched.
	 Tkatchev stretched with 1/1 t.
	 Tkatchev stretched with ½ t. to mix el-grip into
back uprise to hdst.
	 Tkatchev straddled with ½ t. to mix el-grip into back uprise to hdst.
Tkatchev straddled ½ t. to double elgrip.
	 Back uprise and piked vault with ½ t. to hang.
	 Back uprise and hecht stretched with 3/2 t. to
hang.
	 Piatti stretched.
	 Stalder, stoop circle or free hip circle bwd to 
Tkatchev straddle.
	 Piatti stretched with ½ t. to mix el-grip into back
uprise to hdst.
	 Back uprise and rear vault with ¼ t. to hang.
	 Piatti piked.
		Piatti stretched with 1/1 turn.
Piatti with ½ t. to mix el-grip into back up. to hdst. 
	 Salto fwd. stretched, also from el-grip.
	 Swing bwd. and salto fwd. t., p. or strad. to hg.
also from el-grip.
	 Salto fwd. stretched with 1/1 t. also from el grip.
	 Salto fwd. stretched with 2/1 t. also from el grip.
Swing fwd. and counter salto fwd. strad. to hg.
Yamawaki ½ t. stretched to mixed grip into back
uprise to hdst.
	 Salto fwd, tuck or strad. over the bar, also from el-grip.
Czech giant and vault bwd. strad. to hang.
Gaylord piked.
	 Gaylord with ½ t.
Pegan Pike.
	 Swing fwd. and salto bwd. strad. w. ½ t. to hg.
	 Kovacs stretched or piked with 1/1 turn.
	 Swing fwd. and salto bwd. piked w. ½ t. to hang.
	 Swing fwd. and salto bwd. w. 3/2 t. to hang.
	Stalder ½ t. to rear vault with ¼ t. to hang.
Salto bwd. ½ t.tucked over the bar.
	 Salto bwd. ½ t.piked over the bar.
Double salto bwd. t. over the bar.
Kovacs piked or stretched.
Kovacs with 2/1 t.
	 Kovacs with 1/1 t.
	 Kovacs with 3/2 t. to mix grip.

EG III: In bar and Adler elements
	 Kip to hdst. or from mixed grip to hdst w. ½ t. 	 Kip to hdst. in under or mixed grip w. 1/1 t. to 	 Kip to hdst. in under or mixed grip w. 1/1 t. to
mixed grip.
el-grip.
	 Weiler with 1/1 turn to mixed - grip.
	 From hdst., free hip circle fwd. thr. hdst.
	 Weiler with 1/1 turn to double el - grip.
	 Weiler with ½ turn.
From hang or from support, free hip circle 	 Weiler con ½ giro
through handstand.
From hang or from support, free hip circle 	
From hang or from support, free hip circlethrough handstand with ½ turn.
through handstand with ½ turn to el grip.

EG III: In bar and Adler elements
	 From hang or from support, free hip circle hop
to handstand.
	 From hang or from support, free hip circle hop
	 through handstand with 1/1 turn.
	 Free circle fwd. straddled or legs together thr. hdst.
	 Endo with ½ t. thr. hdst.
	 Stalder with hop 1/1 t. through hdst.
	 Free circle bwd. straddle or legs together thr. 
	 Stalder with hop 3/2 turn through hdst. in mix 	 Stalder with hop 3/2 turn through hdst. in el-grip.
hdst.
el-grip.
	 Endo with 1/1 t. thr. hdst. in el-grip.
	 Endo. with 1/1 t. thr. hdst. in mixt grip.
	 Stalder with ½ turn through hdst.
	 Stalder with ½ turn through hdst. in el-grip.
	 Stalder with hop through hdst.
	 Stalder with hop through hdst. in el-grip.
Stoop circle rearward fwd. through hdst.
Adler and 1/1 t. through hdst. in ungr.
Adler with ½ t. through hdst. in ovgr.
	 Adler hop to hdst. in ungr. or ovgr. or mixed grip.
Adler and 1/1 t. thr. hdst. in mixed grip, also
with hop.
	 Back toss to dorsal hang.
	 Stoop in and free back toss to dorsal hang.
	 From dorsal hang, uprise fwd. to support rw. 
Endo in el-grip and 1/1 t. to mixed grip or undergrip.
	 Steineman uprise w. stoop or to hdst.
Endo in el-grip thr. hdst.
Steineman uprise w. flank bwd. to sup. or hang. 	

EG III: In bar and Adler elements
Koste ½ turn to elgrip.
	
Stoop circle fwd. to straddle cut with ½ t.
Carballo with ½ turn to mixed el-grip.
Quintero to el-grip.
Stoop circle fwd. to straddle cut to hang or sup. 	
Stoop circle fwd. to straddle cut through hdst. 	
	 Salto fwd. piked or stretched, also with ½ t.
2.	 Salto avant tendue avec 1/1 ou 3/2 t.
	 Salto fwd. str. with 1/1 or 3/2 t.
3.	 Salto avant tendue avec 2/1 ou 5/2 t.
	 Salto fwd. str. with 2/1 or 5/2 t.
	 Triple salto fwd. t.
Double salto fwd. t. or p. with 1/1 or 3/2 t.
Double salto fwd. t. or p. with 2/1 or 5/2 t.
	 Double salto fwd. t. or p.or with ½ turn.
	 Double salto fwd. t. or p. or with ½ turn over 	 Dbl. salto fwd. t. or p. w. 1/1 or 3/2 t. over the bar.
the bar.
Double salto fwd. str. or with ½ t.	
Double salto fwd. str. with 1/1 or 3/2 t.
	 Salto bwd. piked or str. also with ½ or 1/1 t.
	 Salto bwd. str. with 3/2 or 2/1 t.
	
Salto bwd. str. with 5/2 or 3/1 t.
	
Double salto bwd. tuck or pike.
	
Double salto bwd. t. or pike with 1/1 t.
	 Double salto bwd. t. or p. with 2/1 t.
	
Double salto bwd. str.
	
Double salto bwd. str. with 3/1 t.
	
Double salto bwd. str. with 1/1 t.

Double salto bwd. str. with 2/1 t.
	 Triple salto bwd. t. or over the bar.

EG IV: Dismounts

	
Double salto bwd. t. or p. over the bar.
	
Dbl. salto bwd. t. or p. with 1/1 t. over the bar. 	
Double salto bwd. t. or p. with 2/1 t. over the bar
	 Doble mortal atrás agr. o en carpa por encima de 	
	
Triple salto bwd. p.
57.	Double salto arrière tendu par-dessus la barre. 58.	Double salto arrière tendu avec 1/1 t. par-dessus 59.
	 Double salto bwd. str over the bar.
	 Doble mortal ext. por encima de la barra.
	 Double salto bwd. str. w. 1/1 t. over the bar.
60.	Triple salto arrière gr. avec 1/1 t.
	 Triple salto bwd. t. with 1/1 t.
Hecht strad., hecht or hecht w. ½ t.
	
Hecht w. 1/1 or 3/2 t.


PART IV
Appendices

Appendix A
Additional Explanations & Interpretations

1.	The text in the difficulty tables supersedes the illustrations.
2.	(See Art. 7.4.m) This rule is interpreted, in part, as follows:
a)	Twisting elements on all six apparatus will not be recognized
if they are performed with a 1/4 twist (90°) short of or beyond
the specifications for the intended element
b)	Swinging elements on all appropriate apparatus will not be
recognized if they are completed 45° or greater from the perfect or the prescribed end position. On the Horizontal Bar this
means, for example, that a free hip circle can be performed
up to 45° past a handstand and still be recognized by the DJury. On the Parallel Bars, for example, a Stützkehre must be
performed to at least 45° above horizontal to be recognized by
the D-Jury. A stretched position is considered piked if at any
time during the element a pike of greater than 45° is shown.
3.	 (See Section 9.1.1) Being performed with perfection implies also
that elements be performed with the specified body position. The
following definitions will apply.
a)	A perfect stretched body position is one in which a line from
the shoulders through the hips to the ankles is straight for
static elements and straight or slightly bent forwards or backwards during dynamic elements. If the hip assumes a flexion
of greater than 45° at any time during the element, it will be
considered piked.
b)	A perfect piked body position is one in which the knees are
straight and the hips are bent at least 90°. Errors include a
pike of less than 90° from the extended position and/or an
additional bending of the knees. If the knees assume a flexion
of greater than 45° at any time during the element, it will be
considered tucked.
c)	A perfect tuck position is one during which the hips are strongly
bent and the bent knees are brought to the chest - a minimum
90° bend in each. Errors include a hip bend of less than 90°
from the extended position and/or a knee bend of less than
90°.
d)	A stretched position with a knee flexion of 90° is considered
to be stretched but with a large error. If this occurs during an
element it will not be recognized by the D-jury.
e)	A straddled position must be shown with the maximum separation of the legs that the aesthetic and technical nature of the
element allows.
f)	 Each of the salto positions - tucked, piked, stretched, straddled
- is expected to be demonstrated so distinctly and conspicuously as to leave no doubt about the intent.
g)	A regular handstand on all apparatus is one with the body
perfectly aligned and without arch. A wide arm handstand on
Floor Exercise requires the head to be within one hand width
of the floor.
h)	Strength holds on all affected apparatus require, depending
on the element, the arms to be perfectly horizontal, and/or the
body to be perfectly horizontal, and/or the legs to be perfectly
horizontal.
i)	Certain dynamic elements when poorly performed can be
confused with other elements. Some typical examples include:
i.	 Twisting elements on all apparatus that over- or under-turn
by more than 90º.
ii.	 On Pommel Horse; cross support travels which are
oblique by more than 45º versus travels in side support.
iii.	 On Vault; handspring forward with salto (Group I) versus
¼ turn in preflight and ¼ turn off with salto forward (Group
II).
	In all such cases, the gymnast is obligated to demonstrate
the element he wishes to show in a distinct and unmistakable
manner. Failure to do so will always result in a large deduction
from the E-jury and non-recognition by the D-jury (or on Vault,
recognition as the element and Group with the lower value).
j)	 Exceptions can be made if the correct technical execution of
an element requires a modification of these definitions.
4.	 (See Section 9.1.4) This, along with Article 5.2.b is a most important directive for all judges especially with the stated expectation
that all elements be performed to perfect end positions. The judge
must at all times use his gymnastics knowledge and gymnastics
sense. The following examples may be instructive.
a)	It is possible to perform elements such as a Tkatchev to a
handstand on Horizontal Bar but it is not yet a reasonable, nor
perhaps a desirable, expectation. It is reasonable, however,
to expect in all cases that the element be performed with
technique of such excellence that the gymnast has had time
to prepare for the re-grasp, that it occur with straight arms,
and that it permit continuation with a smooth full swing.
b)	It is possible to perform a dislocate to handstand from inverted
hang on Rings, but it would certainly be an exception. The
deduction for not completing this element in handstand would
not apply.
c)	Some elements have a special purpose or effect and if such
purpose is conspicuous and aesthetic it would be exempt from
the usual amplitude requirements.
d)	It is possible to perform a reverse Stützkehre on Parallel Bars
through a handstand but that is essentially a different element
(it is listed as such in the Difficulty Tables) and should not
become the regular expectation for a reverse Stützkehre.
e)	There exist a small number of elements (bent arm vs. straight
arm press on several apparatus; amplitude on scales on Floor
Exercise; V-sits vs. high V-sits (Manna) on several apparatus;
planche vs. swallow on Rings) where intermediate positions
make recognition for the D-jury and evaluation difficult for
the E-Jury. The gymnast is expected to show his intended
position or performance so distinctly and conspicuously as to
leave no doubt about the intent. Intermediate or non-distinct
positions are always deducted by the E-Jury and may lead to
non-recognition by the D-jury.
5)	Parts of the pommel horse.
	 To assist in the definition of circles and travels in side support or
cross support, the parts of the horse are defined according to the
following diagrams.

	
counter-clockwise	
clockwise
		 Elements in Side Support

Elements in Cross Support


CODE DE POINTAGE 2017
GYMNASTIQUE ARTISTIQUE MASCULINE
2017 CODE OF POINTS
MEN’S ARTISTIC GYMNASTICS
For men’s artistic gymnastics competitions at
World Championships
Olympic Games
Regional and Intercontinental Competitions
Events with international participants
In competitions for nations with lower level of gymnastics
development, as well as for Junior Competitions, modified
competition rules should be appropriately designed by continental
or regional technical authorities, as indicated by the age and level
of development (see the FIG Age Group Development Program)
The Code of Points is the property of the FIG. Translation and
copying are prohibited without prior written approval by FIG. In
case any statement contained herein is in conflict with the Technical Regulations, the Technical Regulations shall take precedence.
Where there is a difference among the languages, the English text
shall be considered correct.
Steve Butcher USA
Yoon Soo Han KOR
Hardy Fink CAN
Steve Butcher USA
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
President 	
1st Vice-president 	
2nd Vice-president 	
Member	
Member	
Member 	
Member 	
Athletes’ Representative	
Steve Butcher USA
Yoon Soo Han KOR
Illustrations 	
	
Symbols 	

Spanish translation and text 	
Elaboration and layout 	
Hardy Fink CAN
Steve Butcher USA
ABBREVIATIONS
Hardy Fink CAN
Steve Butcher USA
ABREVIATURAS
FX	 -	Suelo
VT	 -	Salto
HB	 -	Barra
MTC	 -	 Men’s Technical Committee
OG	 -	 Olympic Games
WC	 -	 World Championships
TR	 -	 Technical Regulations
COP	 -	 Code of Points
PH	 -	 Pommel Horse
SR	 -	Rings
VT	 -	Vault
HB	 -	 Horizontal Bar
CV	 -	 Connection Value
Steve Butcher USA
Yoon Soo Han KOR

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PARTIE I - PRESCRIPTIONS POUR LES PARTICIPANTS
PART I - REGULATIONS GOVERNING COMPETITION
PARTICIPANTS
COMPETICIÓN
Section 1 - Objectif
Section 1 - Purpose
Section 2 - Regulations governing Gymnasts
Article 2.1 - Rights of Gymnasts 	
Article 2.2 - Responsibilities of the Gymnast	
Article 2.3 - Duties of the Gymnast	
Section 3 - Regulations for coaches
Article 3.1 - Rights of the Coaches
Article 3.2 - Responsibilities of the Coaches
Article 3.4 - Inquiries
Section 4 - Regulations for Technical Committee
Article 4.1 - The President of the MTC
Article 4.2 - MTC Members
Section 5 - Regulations and structure of apparatus juries
Article 5.1 - Responsibilities
Article 5.2 - Rights
Article 5.3 - Composition of the Apparatus Jury
Article 5.4 - Functions of the Apparatus Jury
Article 5.5 - Functions of Timers, Line judges, and Secretaries
Article 5.6 - Seating Arrangements
Article 5.8 - Naming of New elements
PART II - EVALUATION OF THE EXERCISES
Section 6 - Evaluation of the Competition Exercises
Article 6.1 - General Rules
Article 6.2 - Determination of the Final Score
Section 7 - Regulations governing the D Score
Article 7.1 - Difficulty
Article 7.2 - Element Groups and Dismount Requirements
Article 7.3 - Connection Points
Article 7.4 - Evaluation by the D Jury
Article 7.5 - Repetition
Article 7.6 - D jury evaluation table
Section 8 - Regulations governing the E Score
Article 8.1 - Description of exercise presentation
Article 8.2 - Calculation of E Jury deductions
Article 8.3 - Instructions for the gymnasts
3
Section 9 - Technical Directives
Article 9.1 - Evaluation by the E jury
Article 9.2 - Determination of execution and technical errors
Article 9.3 - Expectations for exercise construction
Article 9.4 - E jury deductions
PART III - Apparatus
	
	
Article 10.2 - Content and Construction
Article 10.4 - Table of Elements
Section 11 - Pommel Horse
Article 11.2 - Content and Construction
Article 11.4 - Table of Elements
Section 12 - Rings
Article 12.2 - Content and Construction
Article 12.4 - Table of Elements
Section 13 - Vault
Article 13.2 - Content and Construction
Article 13.4 - Table of Elements
Section 14 - Parallel Bars
Article 14.2 - Content and Construction
Article 14.4 - Table of Elements
Section 15 - Horizontal Bar
Article 15.2 - Content and Construction
Article 15.4 - Table of Elements
	
	
A. Additional Explanations and interpretations

PART I
Regulations Governing Competition Participants
Section 1
But
Section 1
Purpose
Article 1
Article 1
The primary purpose of the Code of Points is to:
1.	Provide an objective means of evaluating gymnastics exercises
at all levels of regional, national, and international competitions.
Section 2
Section 2
Regulations governing gymnasts
Article 2.1 Rights of gymnasts
General
The gymnast is guaranteed the right to:
a)	Have their performance judged correctly, fairly, and in accordance with the stipulations of the Code of Points.
b)	Receive in writing the evaluation of the difficulty rating for a
submitted new vault or element within a reasonable time prior
to the start of the competition.
c)	Have their score publicly displayed immediately following his
performance or in accordance with the specific regulations
governing that competition.
d)	Repeat their entire exercise, if the exercise has been interrupted for reasons beyond his control or responsibility with
permission of the Superior Jury.
e)	Briefly leave the competition hall for personal reasons and that
such a request not be unreasonably denied with permission
from the Chair of the Superior Jury.
General
	 NOTE: The competition may not be delayed through his absence.
f)	Receive through their delegation leader the correct result
output, showing all his scores received in the competition.
absence.
2.	Standardize the judging of the four phases of FIG official competitions: Qualification Team Finals, All Around and Apparatus
Finals.
3.	Assure the identification of the best gymnast in any competition.
4.	Guide coaches and gymnasts in the composition of competition
5.	Provide information about the source of other technical information and regulations frequently needed at competitions by
judges, coaches, and gymnasts.
5
NOTE:
Apparatus
The gymnast is guaranteed the right to:
a)	Have identical apparatus and mats in the training halls, warmup hall and on the competition podium that conforms to the
specifications and norms for FIG official competitions.
b)	Use of mandatory additional 10 cm soft mats on top of the existing basic landing mats (20 cm) for Vault and Horizontal Bar.
c)	Be assisted to the hanging position by a coach or gymnast for
the start of their exercise on Rings and Horizontal Bar.
d)	Have one spotter present at Rings and Horizontal Bar.
e)	Rest or recuperate in the allowable time following a fall from
the apparatus.
f)	 Confer with their coach during the allowable time available to
him following a fall from the apparatus and between the first
and second vaults.
g)	Request permission to raise the Horizontal Bar and/or Rings
to accommodate their height.
h)	Repeat the entire exercise (Rings or Horizontal Bar only)
without deduction at the end of the rotation with approval by
the D-jury, if the gymnast shows a significantly torn handguard
(grip) causing a fall or exercise interruption.
Warm-up
In Qualifying, All Around Final and Team Final·
-	 Each competing gymnast (including substitute of injured gymnast) is entitled to a touch warm-up period immediately prior to
the competition on the podium on all apparatus in accordance
with the Technical Regulations that govern that competition:
-	 30 sec. on all apparatus except Parallel Bar
-	 50 sec. on Parallel Bars, including bar preparation
NOTE:
-	 In Qualifying and Team Final the entire warm-up time belongs
to the team. The team must pay attention to the time elapsed
so that the last gymnast receives a warm-up.
-	 In mixed-groups the warm-up time belongs personally to the
gymnast. The order of warm up should be the same as the
order of competition.
-	 The end of the warm-up period is signaled by an audible signal.
If a gymnast is mentally and physically prepared to vault or is still
on the apparatus at that time, they may complete the element or
sequence started. Following the warm-up period or during the
“competition pause”, the apparatus may be prepared, but
not used.
-	 There will be a conspicuous signal from the D1 judge (at official FIG competitions, a green light) 30 seconds before their
exercise is expected to begin.
NOTA:
6
prescriptions.
Article 2.2 Responsibilities of the gymnast
a)	To know the Code of Points and conduct himself accordingly.
fin.
Article 2.3 Duties of the gymnast
General
a)	To present himself raising 1 or 2 arms and thereby acknowledge the D1 judge at the commencement of his exercise and to
acknowledge the same judge at the conclusion of his exercise.
b)	To begin the exercise within 30 seconds of the green light or
signal from D1 (on all apparatus).
c)	To remount within 30 seconds after a fall (the timing starts
when the gymnast is on his feet after the fall). In this time the
gymnast can recuperate, re - chalk, confer with his coach and
remount.
d)	To leave the podium immediately after the conclusion of their
e)	To refrain from changing the height of any apparatus, unless
permission has been granted.
f)	 To refrain from speaking with active judges during the competition.
g)	To refrain from delaying the competition, remaining on the
podium for too long, remounting the podium on completion of
his exercise, and from otherwise abusing his rights or infringing
on those of any other participant.
h)	To refrain from any other undisciplined or abusive behavior
or infringing on those of any other participant (i.e. marking
the floor carpet with magnesium, damaging any apparatus
surface or parts during preparation for his exercise or removing
springs from the spring board. These violations will be treated
as apparatus related violations, and will be deducted as large
errors with 0.5 points).
i)	 To notify the Superior Jury, if a necessity arises to leave the
competition hall. The Competition may not be delayed through
his absence.
j)	 To leave the supplementary mats in position (for landing) during
the entire exercise.
k)	To participate in the respective Award Ceremony dressed in
competition attire according to FIG Protocol.
b)	To submit, or have their coach submit, a written request at least
24 hours before podium training to the Chair of the Superior
Jury to assess the difficulty of a new element.
c)	To submit, or have their coach submit, a written request at least
24 hours before podium training to the Chair of the Superior
Jury to raise the Horizontal Bar and/or Rings; or to submit
such requests in accordance with the Technical Regulations
that govern that competition.
7
Competition Attire
a)	They must wear long gymnastics pants and socks on Pommel Horse, Rings, Parallel Bars, and Horizontal Bar. Long
gymnastics pants, socks and/or slippers that are black or the
darker shades of blue, brown or green are not permitted.
b)	They have the option of wearing short pants with or without
socks or long gymnastics pants with socks on Floor Exercise
and Vault.
c)	The wearing of a gymnastics singlet on all apparatus is compulsory.
d)	They have the option of wearing of gymnastic footwear and /
e)	They must wear the bib number supplied by the organizing
f)	 They must wear a national identification or emblem on their
singlet in accordance with the most recent FIG Publicity Rules.
g)	They must wear only those logos, advertising and sponsorship
identifiers that are permitted in the most recent FIG Publicity
Rules.
h)	The competition attire must be identical for members from the
same federation in the Qualification and Team Final Competitions. In the Qualification individual gymnasts from the same
federation (without a team) may wear different competition
i)	 Handguards, body bandages, and wrist wraps are permitted;
they must be securely fastened, in good repair and should not
detract from the aesthetics of the performance. Skin-colored
bandages are recommended.
a)	The normal penalty for a violation of the rules and expectations
presented in Article 2 and Article 3 are considered medium
errors of 0.30 points for behavioral violations and large errors
of 0.50 points for apparatus related violations.
b)	A few other possibilities for penalties also exist and these are
outlined below.
c)	Unless otherwise indicated these penalties are always applied
by the D1 judge to the Final Score for that exercise.
d)	In extreme cases, the gymnast or coach may be expelled
from the competition hall in addition to suffering the specified
penalty.
e)	Violations and the associated penalties are:

Violation
Penalty
Behaviour Related Violations
2.3).
Any attire violations (Art. 2.3).
Not acknowledging the D1 judge
before or after the exercise.
0.30 for each time from the Final
Score by the D1 judge.
Exceeding 30 sec. before commencing exercise.
0.30 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.
Exceeding 60 sec. before commencing exercise.
Exercise is terminated.
Exceeding 30 sec. before continuing after a fall.
0.30 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.
D1.
Exceeding 60 sec. before continuing after a fall.
Exercise is terminated at the fall
Remounting podium after the exercise.
0.30 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.
D1.
Coach speaking with gymnast during the exercise.
0.30 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.
D1.
Other undisciplined or abusive behaviour.
0.30 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.
D1.
0.30 from the Final Score (once for
a competition session) Applied by
the Chair of the Superior Jury.
Apparatus Related Violations
Non-permitted presence of spotter.
0.50 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.
D1.
Incorrect use of magnesium and/or
damaging apparatus.
0.50 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.
D1.
0.50 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.
requerida.
D1.
Coach moving supplementary mats
during the exercise.
0.50 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.
D1.
Changing the height of the apparatus without permission.
0.50 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.
D1.
Re-arrangement or removal
springs from the springboard.
0.50 from the Final Score by the
D1 judge.
D1.
Illegal use of supplementary mats
or non-use where required.
of
Other Individual Violations
Absent from the competition area
without permission failure to return
and complete the competition.
Absent from Victory Ceremony.
Disqualification from remainder of
competition (By the Chair of the
Superior Jury).
Result and Final Score is annulled
for team and individual purposes
(By Superior Jury).
Performing without signal or green
light.
Final Score = 0 points.
9
Team Violations
Team gymnast(s) compete in wrong
order on an apparatus.
1,0 from the Total Team Score on
the applicable apparatus (By Chair
of the Superior Jury).
Violations of attire regulations that
apply to Team Competition.
1,0 from the Total Team Score,
once per competition, applied by
the Chair of the Superior Jury.
“In the name of all gymnasts, I promise that we shall take part in this
World Championships (or any other official FIG Event) respecting
and abiding by the rules which govern them, committing ourselves
to a sport without doping and without drugs, in the true spirit of
sportsmanship, for the glory of sport and the honour of the gymnasts.”
Section 3
Section 3
Regulations for coaches
Article 3.1 Rights of the Coaches
The coach is guaranteed the right to:
a)	Assist the gymnast or team under his care in submitting written
requests related to the raising of apparatus and the rating of
a new vault or element.
b)	Assist the gymnast or team under their care on the podium
during the warm up period on all apparatus.
c)	Help the gymnast or team prepare the apparatus for competition. Preparation of any apparatus may be performed by
coaches for the upcoming rotation upon completion of the
final exercise in the current rotation and publication of the last
d)	Lift the gymnast to a hanging position on the Rings and Horizontal Bar.
e)	Be present on the podium after the green light is lit to remove
the springboard on - Parallel Bars.
f)	 Be present at Rings and Horizontal Bar during the gymnast’s
exercise for reasons of safety.
g)	Assist or advise the gymnast during the thirty seconds after a
fall on all apparatus and between the first and second vault.
h)	Have their gymnast’s score publicly displayed immediately
following their performance or in accordance with the specific
regulations governing that competition.
i)	 Be present at all apparatus to help in case of injuries or defects
of the apparatus.
j)	Inquire to Superior Jury concerning the evaluation of the
content of the exercise of the gymnast (see Art. 3.4).
k)	Request to Superior Jury a review of the Time and Line deductions.
art. 3.4).
10
prescriptions.
Article 3.2 Responsibilities of the Coaches to:
a)	Know the Code of Points and conduct himself accordingly.
b)	Submit the competition order and other information required in
accordance with the Code of Points and/or the FIG Technical
Regulations that govern that competition.
c)	Refrain from changing the height of any apparatus or adding,
rearranging or removing springs from the springboard.
d)	Refrain from delaying the competition, obstructing the view of
the judges and from otherwise abusing or interfering with the
rights of any other participant.
e)	Refrain from speaking to the gymnast or from assisting in any
other way (give signals, shouts, cheers or similar) during his
performance.
f)	 Refrain from engaging in discussions with active judges and/
or other persons outside of the inner arena circle during the
competition (exception: team doctor, delegation leader).
g)	Refrain from any other undisciplined or abusive behavior.
h)	Conduct themselves in a fair and sportsmanlike manner at all
times during the competition.
i)	 Participate in a sportsmanlike manner in any applicable Award
Ceremony.
NOTE: See Deductions for Violations and Unsportsmanlike Behavior.
Number of Coaches Permitted in the Inner Circle:
Qualifying and Team Final Competitions
- Nations with individuals
1 or 2 coaches
1 coach
All - Around Competition and Apparatus Finals
Competition for
1 coach
Behavior of coach
Comportement antisportif (valable
By Chair of Superior Jury (In
Consultation with Superior Jury)
For FIG Official and Registered
Competitions
Behavior of Coach with no direct impact on the result/performance
of the gymnast/team
Unsportsmanlike conduct (valid for
all phases of the competition).
1st time –Yellow card for coach
(warning).
2nd time –Red card for coach and
removal of coach from the competition.*
Other flagrant, undisciplined and
abusive behaviour (valid for all
phases of the competition).
Immediate Red card for coach and
removal of coach from the competition.*
11
Behaviour of Coach with direct impact on the result/performance of
the gymnast/team
Unsportsmanlike conduct, i.e. unexcused delay or interruption of
competition, speaking to active
judges during the competition except to D1 - Judge (inquiry only
permitted), speaking directly to the
gymnast, by giving signals, shouts
(cheers) or similar during the exercise, etc.
etc.
1st time – 0.50 (from gymnast/team
at event) and Yellow card for coach
(warning) if coach speaks to active
judges.
1st time – 1.00 (from gymnast/team
at event) and Yellow card for coach
(warning) if coach speaks aggressively to active judges.
2nd time – 1.00 (from gymnast/team
at event), Red card for coach and
removal of coach from the competition floor.*
Other flagrant, undisciplined and
abusive behaviour, i.e. incorrect
presence of unauthorized persons
etc.
– 1.00 (from gymnast/team at
event), immediate Red card for
coach and removal of coach from
the competition floor.*
Note: If one of two coaches from a team is dismissed from the competition inner circle, it is possible to replace that coach with another
coach one time during the entire competition.
1st offense = yellow card.
2nd offense = red card, at which time the coach is excluded from
the rest of the competition phases.
*if there is only one coach, then the coach would remain in the
competition but would not be eligible for accreditation at the
next World Championships, Olympic Games.
Article 3.4 Inquiries
Please refer to TR (Technical Regulations).
“In the name of all Coaches and other members of the athlete’s
entourage, I promise that we shall commit ourselves to ensuring
that the spirit of sportsmanship and ethics is fully adhered to and
upheld in accordance with the fundamental principles of Olympism.
We shall commit ourselves to educating the gymnasts to adhere to
fair play and drug free sport and to respect all FIG Rules governing
the World Championships.”
12
Section 4
Section 4
Regulations for the Technical Committee
Article 4.1 The President of the MTC
The President of the Men’s Technical Committee or his representative will serve as Chair of the Superior Jury. Their responsibilities
and those of the Superior Jury include:
a)	The overall Technical Direction of the competition as outlined
in the Technical Regulations.
b)	To call and chair all judges’ meetings and instruction sessions.
masculin.
finale).
c)	To apply the stipulations of the Judges’ Regulations applying
to that competition.
d)	To deal with requests for evaluation of new elements, raising
the Horizontal Bar and/or Rings, leaving the competition area,
and other issues that may arise. Such decisions are normally
made by the Men’s Technical Committee.
e)	To make sure that the time schedule published in the Work
plan is respected.
f)	 To control the work of the Apparatus Supervisors and intervene
if deemed necessary. Except in case of an inquiry, time or line
errors, generally no change of score is allowed after the score
has been flashed on the score board.
g)	To deal with inquiries as outlined herein.
h)	In cooperation with the members of the Superior Jury, to issue
warnings to or replace any person acting in any judging capacity who is considered to be unsatisfactory or to have broken
their oath.
i)	 To conduct a global video analysis (post competition) with the
TC to determine errors in judgment and to submit the results
of the Judges evaluation to the FIG Disciplinary Commission.
j)	To supervise the checking of the apparatus measurement
specifications according to the FIG Apparatus Norms.
k)	In unusual or special circumstances may nominate a judge to
the competition.
l)	 To submit a report to the FIG Executive Committee, which must
be sent to the FIG Secretary General as soon as possible,
but no later than 30 days after the event, which contains the
following:
·	 General remarks about the competition including special
occurrences and conclusions for the future.
·	 Detailed analyses of the judges’ performance including
proposals for rewarding the best judges and sanctions
against the judges who fail to meet expectations within 3
months.
·	 Detailed list of all interventions (score changes before
and after publication).
·	 Technical analyses of the D-judges’ scores.
FIG.
Article 4.2 The MTC Members
During each phase of the competition, the members of the Men’s
Technical Committee or their representatives will serve as members
of the Superior Jury and Apparatus Supervisors for each apparatus.
Their responsibilities include:
a)	To participate in the direction of the judges’ meetings and
instruction sessions and guide the judges to perform the correct work on their respective apparatus.
b)	To apply the Judges’ Regulations control with fairness, consistency and completely in accordance with the currently valid
regulations and criteria.
c)	To record the entire exercise content in symbol notation.
d)	To calculate the D and E Score (control scores) for the purpose
of evaluation of the D, R and E Panels.
e)	To control the total evaluation and the final score for each exercise.
f)	 To assure that the gymnast is given the correct score for their
performance or intervene as ruled herein.
Section 5
Section 5
Regulations and Structure of apparatus Juries
Article 5.1 Responsibilities
Every judge is fully and solely responsible for their own scores.
All members of the Apparatus Juries have the responsibility to:
a)	Have thorough knowledge of:
-	 the FIG Technical Regulations,
-	 the Code of Points,
-	 the FIG Judges’ Rules,
-	 any other technical information necessary to carry out
their duties during a competition.
b)	Be in possession of the international Judge’s Brevet valid for
the current Cycle and produce the Judge’s Log Book.
c)	Possess the Category necessary for the level of competition
they are judging.
d)	Have extensive knowledge in contemporary gymnastics and to
understand the intent, purpose, interpretation, and application
of each rule.
e)	Attend all scheduled instruction sessions and meetings of
judges before the respective Competition (extraordinary
exceptions, which were unavoidable, will actually be decided
by the FIG MTC).
f)	 Adhere to any special organizational or judging related instruction given by the governing authorities (i.e. Scoring system
instructions).
g)	To check the apparatus used at training, warm-up and competition with the FIG Apparatus Norms.
g)	Participation in podium training is mandatory for all judges.
CTM/FIG).
14
h)	Be prepared thoroughly on all apparatus
i)	 Be capable of fulfilling the various necessary mechanical duties, which include:
-	 Correctly completing any required score sheets.
-	 Using any necessary computer or mechanical equipment.
-	 Facilitating the efficient running of the competition.
-	 Communicating effectively with other judges
j)	 Be well prepared, rested, vigilant, and punctually present at
least one hour before the start of competition or according to
the instructions from the Work plan.
k)	Wear the FIG prescribed competition uniform (dark blue jacket,
grey trousers, light coloured shirt with tie), except at the OG,
where the uniform is supplied by the Organizing Committee.
During the competition judges must:
a)	Behave at all times in a professional manner and exemplify
non-partisan ethical behavior.
b)	Fulfill the functions outlined as specified in Article 5.4
c)	Evaluate each exercise accurately, consistently, quickly, objectively and fairly; when in doubt, give the benefit of that doubt
to the gymnast.
d)	Maintain a record of their personal scores.
e)	Remain in own assigned seat (except with the consent of D1
Judge) and refrain from having contact or discussions with
gymnasts, coaches, delegation leaders or other judges.
	 Penalties for inappropriate evaluation and behavior by judges will
be in accordance with the current version of the FIG Judges’ Rules
and/or the TR that apply to that competition.
Article 5.2 Rights
	 In case of an intervention by the Superior Jury, the Judge has the
right to explain their score and to agree (or not) to a change. In
case of disagreement the Judge may be overruled by the Superior
Jury and shall be informed accordingly.
	 In case of arbitrary action taken against a judge, they have the
right to file an appeal:
a)	to the Superior Jury, if the action was initiated by the Apparatus
b)	to the Jury of Appeal, if the action was initiated by the Superior Jury.
Article 5.3 Composition of the Apparatus Jury
The Apparatus Jury (Judges’ Panels)
	 For the official FIG Competitions, World Championships and
Olympic Games, the Apparatus Jury will consist of a D-Panel and
an E-Panel.
-	 The D Judges are drawn and appointed by the FIG Technical
Committee in accordance with the most current FIG Technical
Regulations
-	 E- Judging Panels and supplementary positions will be drawn
15
under the authority of the TC in accordance with the current
Technical Regulations or Judges’ Rules that govern that competition.
-	 R-Judges are appointed by the FIG Presidential commission.
	 The structure of the Apparatus Jury for the various types of competitions should be as follows:
WC and OG
International Invitational
9 Judge Panel
Minimum 6 Judge Panel
2 D - Panel Judges
2 D - Panel Judges
5 E - Panel Judges
4 E - Panel Judges
2 R - Panel Judges
(Recommended)
				
Line and Time judges:
-	 2 line judges for Floor Exercise,
-	 1 line judge for Vault,
-	 1 time keeper for Floor Exercise,
-	 1 time keeper Parallel Bars warm up time.
	 Modifications to the Judges’ Panels are possible for other international competitions and for national and local competitions.
Article 5.4 Function of the Apparatus Jury
Article 5.4.1 Functions of the D - Panel
a)	D- Panel Judges record the entire exercise content in symbol
notation, evaluate independently, without bias and then jointly
determine the D score content. Discussion is allowed.
b)	The D-Panel enters the D- score into the computer.
c)	The D-score content includes:
-	 The value of elements (difficulty value) according to the
table of elements.
-	 The connections value, based on special rules for each
apparatus.
-	 The number and the value of Element Group Requirements executed.
Function of The D1 judge:
a)	To serve as liaison between the Apparatus Jury and the Apparatus Supervisor. The Apparatus Supervisor will then consult
when necessary with the Superior Jury.
b)	To coordinate the work of the Time Judges, Line Judges and
Secretaries.
c)	To ensure the efficient running of the apparatus including the
control of warm up time.
d)	To display the green light or other conspicuous signal to notify the gymnasts they must begin their exercise within thirty
seconds.
e)	To ensure that neutral deductions for time, line, behavior faults
are taken from the Final Score before being flashed.
16
g)	To ensure the following deductions are applied for:
-	 Failure to present before and after the exercise.
-	 Performance of an invalid “0” vault.
-	 Assistance during the: Vault, Exercise and Dismounts.
Function the D- Panel After the Competition:
	 Will submit a written competition report, as directed by the TC
President with the following information:
-	 Forms listing violations, ambiguities and questionable decisions with the number and name of the gymnast.
-	 The content of all exercises to the President of the Men’s
Technical Committee and the Apparatus Supervisor in the
Superior Jury in one of the official FIG languages within 2
months of the competition.
Article 5.4.2 Functions of the E - Panel
a)	They must observe the exercises attentively, evaluate the
faults and apply the corresponding deductions correctly, independently and without consulting the other judges.
b)	They must record the deductions for:
-	 General Faults.
-	 Technical compositional errors.
-	 Positional Errors.
c)	They must complete the score slip with a legible signature or
enter their deductions into the computer.
d)	They must be able to provide a personal written record of their
evaluation of all exercises.
Article 5.4.3 Function of the Reference Judges
The Reference Judges (2 by apparatus) for Olympic Games and
World Championships were introduced to have an automatic and time
saving correction system in case of problems with Execution scores.
Other competitions may use Reference judges but are not obliged.
Article 5.5 Functions of the Timers, Line Judges and Secretaries
Article 5.5.1 The Timers and Line Judges
The Timers and Line Judges are drawn from among the Brevet
judges to serve as:
Line judges to:
-	 Determine on Floor and VT stepping outside of the border
marking and to acknowledge the fault by raising a red flag.
f)	 To ensure the correct penalties for a short exercise are applied.
-	 Inform the D1 judge of any violation and deduction and sign
and submit the appropriate written record.
Time judges are required to:
-	 Time the duration of the exercise (FX).
17
-	 Ensure adherence to the warm-up time on PB.
-	 On FX give an audible signal to the gymnast at completion of
60 and 70 seconds.
-	 Inform the D1 judge of any violation and deduction and sign
and submit the appropriate written record.
-	 For time violations where there is no computer input, the time
judge must record the exact amount of time over the time limit.
Article 5.5.2 Functions of the Secretaries
The Secretaries need to have COP and computer knowledge. They
are usually appointed by the Organizing Committee. Under the supervision of the D1 Judge, they are responsible for the accuracy of
all entries into the computers:
Article 5.6 Seating Arrangements
The judges will be seated at a location and distance from the apparatus which permits an unobstructed view of the total performance
and which permits them to fulfill all of their evaluation duties.
-	 D- Panel Judges must be in line with the center of the apparatus.
-	 The timer sits by the Apparatus Jury (either side).
-	 The line judges at FX must sit at opposite corners and observe
the 2 lines closest to them.
-	 The line judge at Vault must sit at the far end of the landing
area.
-	 The placement of the E- jury will be clockwise around the apparatus beginning from the left of the D- Panel.
D.
Variations in the seating arrangement are possible depending on
the conditions available in the competition hall.
Adherence to the correct order of the teams and gymnasts.
Operating the green and red lights.
Correct flashing of the Final Score.
Time the duration of the fall period.
Control the start of the exercise after the green light is lit.
	
18
Article 5.7 Judge’s Oath (TR 7.12)
At the World Championships, and other important international
events, juries and judges pledge to respect the terms of the Judges’
Oath:
“In the name of all the judges and officials, I promise that we shall
officiate in these World Championships (or any other official FIG
Event) with complete impartiality, respecting and abiding by the rules
which govern them, in the true spirit of sportsmanship.”
Article 5.8 MAG Naming of New Elements
Any new element performed at an FIG registered competition with an
official FIG TD or FIG MTC member participating, in an accredited
role and in attendance during the performance, is eligible for new
element recognition in the Code of Points. A video of the completed
element must be given to the TC member in attendance for later
review and evaluation at the following MTC meeting.
19
PART II
Evaluation of exercises
Section 6
Section 6
The Evaluation of Competition Exercises
Article 6.1 General Rules
1.	Two separates scores, “D” and “E”, will be calculated on all apparatus.
-	 The D-jury determine the “D” score, the content of an exercise,
and the E-jury the “E” score, i.e. the exercise presentation
related to compositional requirements, technique and body
position.
-	 “D” score content will include by addition:
-	 The additional difficulty value of 10 elements (8 for
juniors), the best 9 (7 for juniors), but maximum 5 elements for the same Element Group, inside the best
counting plus the value of the dismount. If the judge
needs to choose the counting 9 (7 for juniors) elements
from elements which have the same value but belong to
different Element Groups, he must determine them to the
benefit of the gymnast. Once the 9 (7 for juniors) best
counting elements plus the dismount of the exercise are
determined, the judge must count among them not more
than 5 elements from the same element group (for FX,
the Element Group of the dismount will count first).
	
I	 III	 I	 II	 III	III	III	III	IV	IV	 IV
	
A	B	B	B	B	B	B	C	C	C	 D
	
	 B	B	B	B	B	B	C	C	C	 D
Example 1:
	
I	 III	 I	 II	 III	III	III	III	 I	 II	 IV
	
A	B	B	B	B	B	B	C	C	C	 D
	
	 B	B	B	B	B	B	C	C	C	 D
	
I	 III	 I	 II	 III	III	III	III	IV	IV	 IV
	
A	B	B	B	B	B	B	C	C	C	 D
	
	 B	B	B	B	B	B	C	C	C	 D
Example 2:
B	 B	B	B	B	B	B	D	D	D	D	 D
B		 B	B	B	B		 D	D	D	D	 D
B	 B	B	B	B	B	B	D	D	D	D	 D
B		 B	B	B	B		 D	D	D	D	 D
B	 B	B	B	B	B	B	D	D	D	D	 D
B		 B	B	B	B		 D	D	D	D	 D
III	III	 I	 II	 II	 II	 III	III	III	III	IV	 IV
composition.
III	
III	I	 II	II	II	III	III	III	III	I	 IV
In bold letters counting elements.
III	III	 I	 II	 II	 II	 III	III	III	III	IV	 IV
-	 The connections value, based on special rules on different
apparatus.
-	 Element Group Requirements Value, performed among
the 10 counting elements (8 for juniors).
-	 “E” score, will start from 10 points and will evaluate by deductions applied in tenths of a point:
-	 The total deductions for aesthetic and execution errors.
-	 The total deductions for technical and compositional errors.
-	 The highest and the lowest sums of total deductions applied
in tenths of a point for execution, aesthetic, technical and
compositional errors are eliminated. The average remaining
20
sums is subtracted from the 10 points in order to determine
the Final “E” Score.
Article 6.2 - Determination of the Final Score
1. The Final Score of an exercise will be established by the addition
of the “D” and final “E” scores.
2.	The rules governing the evaluation of the exercises and the determination of the Final Score are identical for all sessions of optional
competition (Qualification, Team Final, All Around Final, Apparatus
Finals) except for Vault, where special rules in Qualification and in
Apparatus Finals apply (see Section 13).
3.	The All-Around Score is the sum of the Final Scores obtained on
the six exercises.
4.	The Team Score is calculated in accordance with the current
Technical Regulations that govern that competition.
5.	Qualification for, and participation in, the Team Final, the All Around
Final, and the Apparatus Finals will occur in accordance with the
current Technical Regulations that govern that competition.
6.	The Final Score is normally calculated by the competition scoring
personnel but must be confirmed by the Apparatus Supervisor
before it is displayed.
7.	At official FIG competitions, the single “D” score from the D-jury
and the “E” score (the average of exercise presentation deductions
subtracted from 10 from each judge of the E-jury) will be displayed.
Each individual score of the E-jury will appear on the main results
form. At all other competitions, the “D” score, “E” score and the
Final Score must be displayed.
For exercise presentation, the gymnast may earn a maximum
E- Score of 10.00 points.
The D -Panel will take the appropriate neutral deduction (penalty)
for a short exercise from the Final Score.
- 4.0 points
- 6.0 points
- 8.0 points
7 or more elements 	- 0.0 points
5 - 6 elements 	
- 4.0 points
3 - 4 elements 	
- 6.0 points
1 to 2 elements 	
- 8.0 points
- 10.0 points
Section 7
Section 7
Regulations Governing the D score (DV)
Article 7.1 Difficulty
1.	On Floor Exercise, Pommel Horse, Rings, Parallel Bars, and
Horizontal Bar, the following difficulty values will count in all competitions:
forma:
Parties	A	 B	 C	D	 E	 F	 G	H
Values	 A	 B	 C	D	 E	 F	 G	H
parts					
Value	 0.10	0.20	0.30	0.40	 0.50	 0.60	0.70	0.80
					
21
2.	To the extent possible, only single elements are included in the
Difficulty Tables. Each element is given a unique difficulty value
and a unique Code Identification Number.
3.	Elements that are not listed in the Difficulty Tables must be submitted for a difficulty rating to the Chair of the Superior Jury 24
hours in advance of podium training at official FIG Competitions.
Provisional difficulty ratings may be given by Technical Authorities
at other international, national, and local competitions.
5.	Elements that no longer appear in the Code are usually not permitted or fall below the value of an A.
6.	Elements in same box with different values may be performed in
the same exercise with both elements contributing to the “D” Score.
IV.
Article 7.2 Element Group and Dismount Requirements
1.	With this evaluation category, the judge evaluates those required
movement patterns which, in addition to the gymnast’s personal
inclinations and technical abilities, are intended to enhance the
variety of movement in the construction of an exercise.
2.	Each apparatus has three Element Groups designated as I, II, III,
and, except for Floor Exercise, a Dismount Group designated as
IV.
3.	In his exercise, the gymnast must include at least one element
from each of the three Element Groups.
4.	An element may meet the Element Group requirement only for the
Element Group under which it is located in the Difficulty Tables.
5.	Each Element Group requirement fulfillment (inside the 10 counting
elements) is awarded with 0.5 points by the D-jury.
6.	Every exercise must end with a legitimate dismount listed under
the Dismount Element Group. (see Section 10 and 13 for specific
regulations for Floor Exercise and Vault). Non-legitimate dismounts
include:
i.	 A dismount that pushes off the feet (except on Floor Exercise).
ii.	An exercise finished with a partially shown or incomplete
dismount.
iii.	A dismount that does not land on the feet (including rollout
elements on Floor Exercise).
iv.	A dismount that intentionally lands sideways.
IV.
incompleta.
NB. Such elements always lead to non-recognition by the D-jury
of the element and the Element Group.
4.	An element (or element with the same Code Identification Number)
may be repeated but such repeated element may not contribute
towards the “D” score. See additional regulations restricting repetition for Pommel Horse and Rings in Section 11 and 12.
22
7.	Regarding Dismount element group requirements, the following
rule will be applied:
- A or B value dismount 	 0.00 p. (does not fulfill requirement).
- D or higher value 	
+0.50 p. (full requirement value).
For juniors:
0.00 p. (does not fulfill requirement).
- C or higher value 	
+0.50 p. (full requirement value).
Article 7.3 Connection Points
1.	This evaluation factor provides the D-jury with the possibility of
awarding special connections. Thereby, these Connection Points
serve to better differentiate the exercises which contain special
connections between elements, as particularly described on each
apparatus.
2.	Connection Points may be awarded only for directly connected
recognized high valued elements performed without a large error.
Article 7.4 Evaluation by the D-jury
1. The D-jury is responsible for evaluating the content of the exercise and determining the correct “D” score on each apparatus as
defined in Sections 10 to 15. Except in the circumstances defined
in Article 7.4 the D-jury is obligated to recognize and credit each
legal element that is correctly performed.
2.	The gymnast is expected to include in his exercise only elements
that he can perform with complete safety and with a high degree of
aesthetic and technical mastery. Very poorly performed elements
will not be recognized by the D-jury and will be deducted by the
E-jury.
3.	Each element is defined to the perfect end position or as being
performed with perfection.
4.	An element that is not recognized by the D-jury will receive no
value.
5.	An element will not be recognized by the D-jury if it deviates significantly from the prescribed execution. An element will not be
recognized or credited for reasons including, but not necessarily
restricted to, the following:
a)	If, on Floor Exercise, the element is performed beginning
outside of the floor area (see Section 10 Art. 10.2.1.3a).
b)	 If, on Vault, the gymnast performs an invalid Vault as defined
in Section 13.
c)	 If on Horizontal Bar, an element is performed with or from feet
on the bar (see Section 15).
d)	 If a hold element with straddled legs not listed in the difficulty
tables is performed on any apparatus.
e)	 If the element is so altered in performance that it can no longer
lay any claim to its identification number or value (see also
Appendix A.3.1), for example:
i.	 A strength element performed almost entirely with swing.
23
ii.	 A swing element performed almost entirely with strength.
iii.	A stretched position element performed with a distinct
tuck or pike or vice versa. In such cases an element is
normally given the value of the element as performed.
iv.	 A strength element normally performed with legs together
is performed with legs straddled.
v.	 A strength hold element performed with significantly bent
arms.
vi.	 An element in or to handstand on Rings that is controlled
with the legs or feet against the cables.
f)	 If the element has been completed with the assistance of a
spotter.
g)	If the gymnast falls on or from the apparatus during an element,
or alters, or interrupts it in some other manner.
h)	If the gymnast falls on or from the apparatus during an element
without having reached an end position that permits continuation with at least a swing.
i)	 If a strength hold element or a simple hold element is not held.
j)	 If a press or pull out comes from a strength hold element which
has not been recognized or credited for any reason.
k)	If a twisting element on most apparatus is performed with
an over- or under-rotation of 90° or greater or if a swinging
element is performed with a deviation from the perfect end
position of 45° or greater (see also Appendix A.3.1). In some
circumstances, especially on Vault, an over- or under-rotation
of 90° may result in the recognition of different value for the
vault by the D-jury.
l)	If, on Pommel Horse, elements in cross support or in side
support deviate from the correct support orientation by 45° or
greater for the greater portion of the element.
m) If strength hold positions or simple hold positions on any apparatus deviate from the correct horizontal body, arm, or leg
position by 45° or greater. This means, for example:
i.	 Inverted cross with the head of the gymnast entirely above
the circle of the rings. (This is usually >45°).
ii.	 Cross with the arm pits entirely above the circle of the
rings. (This is usually >45°).
iii.	 (see also Article 9.2.8).
6.	In all cases, the D-jury is to make decisions based on gymnastics
sense and to decide in the interests of the sport of gymnastics. In
cases of doubt, the benefit of that doubt must be given to the gymnast.
7.	Elements performed so poorly that they are not recognized by the
D-jury will normally be severely deducted by the E-jury as well.
24
8.	The elements with the highest difficulty values will be counted first
in cases of Special Repetition.
9.	For recognition of difficulty on Pommel Horse and Floor Exercise,
the dismount is always counted first.
Article 7.5 Repetition
1.	An exercise may not be repeated unless the gymnast has to interrupt his exercise for reasons outside of his control.
2.	If the gymnast falls on or from the apparatus, he may choose to
continue with his exercise from the fall or to repeat the missed
element for credit and continue from there. (See Article 9.2.5).
3.	No element (same Code Identification Number) may be repeated
for difficulty credit or for Connection Points. This applies also to
elements repeated in connections (exceptions: certain Pommel
Horse elements and circles that increase in value if performed
twice in special combinations, and Rings - see Section 11 and 12).
4.	If the difficulty of an element is not recognized for any reason, then
that element can also not meet an Element Group Requirement.
Article 7.6 D - Jury Evaluation
D-jury evaluation
Fulfilling of Element Group Requirements
Adding 0.5 for each
Juniors
Juniors
C value dismount or higher = + 0.5
D value or higher dismount = + 0.5
et 9.4)
A or B value dismount = + 0.0
Non-recognition of the Difficulty
y 9.4)
Assistance by spotter in completion of element
Non-recognition of the Difficulty
Not holding
Non-recognition of the Difficulty
Repeated element
Errors leading to non-recognition
(see Article 7.4 and 9.4)
Permitted but given no value
Pushing with feet for dismount or
other non-legitimate dismount
Straddled strength hold or other
prohibited elements
Non-recognition of the element and
No recognition of the element
25
Section 8
Section 8
Regulations Governing E score
Article 8.1 Description of Exercise Presentation
1.	The Exercise Presentation consists of only those factors that constitute the essence of a contemporary gymnastics performance and
the absence of which results in deductions by the E-jury. These
factors are:
a)	The technical, compositional (general expectations for exercise
construction) aesthetic and execution.
2.	The Exercise Presentation has a maximum value of 10.0 points.
Article 8.2 Calculation of E-jury deductions
1.	The judges of the E-jury, will judge an exercise and determine
the deductions independently and do so within 20 seconds of the
completion of the exercise.
2.	Each performance is evaluated with reference to expectations
of perfect performance. All deviations from this expectation are
deducted.
a)	Deductions for errors in aesthetic and execution, technique
and composition are summed to a maximum of 10.0 points
for Exercise Presentation.
Article 8.3 Instructions for the Gymnast
1.	The gymnast must include in his exercise only elements that he
can perform with complete safety and with a high degree of aesthetic and technical mastery. The responsibility for his safety rests
entirely with him. The E jury is required to deduct very rigorously
for any aesthetic, execution, composition and technical errors.
2.	The gymnast must never attempt to increase the difficulty or the
“D” score at the expense of aesthetic and technical execution.
3.	All mounts must commence from the basic stand position, from
a short run (only Parallel Bars and Horizontal Bar), or from a still
hang. Pre-elements or intermediate elements may not precede
the mount. This rule does not apply to Vault where the specific
rules stated for that apparatus apply.
4.	Dismounts from all apparatus as well as the conclusion on Floor
Exercise and Vault must end in a standing position with the legs
together. With the exception of Floor Exercise, pushing from the
apparatus with the feet in order to execute the dismount is not
Section 9
Section 9
Technical Directives
Article 9.1 Evaluation by the E - jury
1.	The E-Jury is responsible for evaluating all of the aesthetic,
execution and technical performance aspects of an exercise as
well as its compliance with the composition (exercise construction
expectations) for that apparatus. In each case the E -Jury is to
demand that elements be performed with perfection and to perfect
end positions (see also Appendix A.2).
26
2.	The gymnast is expected to include in his exercise only elements
that he can perform with complete safety and with a high degree of
aesthetic and technical mastery. All deviations from that expectation will be deducted rigorously by the E-jury.
3.	The E-jury is not to concern at all with the difficulty of an exercise.
He is obligated to deduct equally severely for any error of the
same magnitude regardless of the difficulty of the element or the
connection.
4.	Judges of the E-Jury (and the D-jury) must remain up-to-date with
contemporary gymnastics, must know at all times what the most
contemporary performance expectation for an element should be,
and must know how standards are changing as the sport evolves.
In this context they must also know what is possible, what is
reasonable to expect, what is an exception, and what is a special
effect (see also Appendix A.3).
5.	The E-Jury must understand to refrain from deducting when some
elements, which otherwise have no errors, are performed for a
special effect or a special purpose. For example:
i.	 On Parallel Bars, a basket or a giant swing deliberately performed with flight and travel, and with a late re-grasp has a
special effect and purpose and should not be deducted for not
ending in handstand. However the onus is on the gymnast to
show the effect or purpose in an unmistakable and conspicuous manner.
ii.	On Horizontal Bar, a giant swing is often modified in preparation for release elements and dismounts. These should not be
deducted for not passing through a handstand unless they are
unnecessary or so extreme as to violate aesthetic, execution
and technical expectations.
6.	If for any reason a judge of the E-Jury cannot reach a decision,
he must give the benefit of the doubt to the gymnast.
7.	The E-jury is obligated to deduct twice for two distinctly different
errors in an element, i.e. if the element has both a technical and
Bars may receive both deductions for insufficient amplitude and
for bent knees.
Article 9.2 Determination of Execution and Technical Errors
1.	Each element is defined to the perfect end position or as being
performed with perfection. (See also Part IV).
2.	All deviations from correct performance are considered execution or technical errors and must be evaluated accordingly by the
judges. The amount of the deduction for small, medium, or large
errors is determined by the degree of deviation from the correct
performance. The same deduction is applied each time for the
same severity of bending, whether it be the arms, legs, or the body.
27		
0,1 p.
0,3 p.
0,5 p.
1,0 p.
3.	The following deductions will apply for each and every discernible aesthetic or technical deviation from the expected perfect
performance. These deductions must be taken regardless of the
difficulty of the element or exercise.
Small Error	
Fall	
0.1 p.
0.3 p.
0.5 p.
1.0 p.
0.1 p.
0.3 p.
0.5 p.
1.0 p.
a)	Small errors: (deduction = 0.1)
i.	 Any minor or slight deviation from the perfect end position
and from perfect technical execution.
ii.	 Any minor adjustments to hand, foot, or body position.
iii.	 Any other minor violations against aesthetic and technical
performance expectations.
b)	Medium errors: (deduction = 0.3)
i.	 Any distinct or significant deviation from the perfect end
position and from perfect technical execution.
ii.	 Any distinct or significant adjustments to hand, foot, or
body position.
iii.	 Any other distinct or significant violation against aesthetic
and technical performance expectations.
i.	 Any major or severe deviation from the perfect end position and from perfect technical execution.
ii.	 Any major or severe adjustments to hand, foot, or body
position.
iii. Any full intermediate swing.
iv.	Any other major or severe violations against aesthetic
and technical performance expectations.
d)	Falls and spotter assistance: (deduction = 1.0 p.)
i.	 Any fall on or from the apparatus during an element
without having reached an end position that permits continuation with at least a swing (i.e. a distinct hang phase
on Horizontal Bar or a distinct support phase on Pommel
Horse after the element in question) or that otherwise
fails to display a momentary control of the element during
landing or re-grasp.
ii.	 -1.0 is the maximum deduction for an element with a fall,
and including all steps, touches, or support on the floor
or mat leading up to the fall. Other execution deductions
incurred for the element (height, landing extension, insufficient twist) still apply.
iii.	 Any assistance by a spotter that contributes to the completion of an element.
4.	On all apparatus at the end of the exercise, if a gymnast does not
perform a dismount, but lands intentionally on the feet, no deduction for a fall will be considered.
28
Petite faute:	
	
	Exemples:
5.	After a fall on or from the apparatus, the exercise may be continued
within 30 seconds and the gymnast may use a necessary number
of elements or movements to return to his starting position but all
of these elements and movements must be performed with perfect
execution. He is permitted to repeat the missed element for credit,
except if the fall occurred during a dismount (except Pommel
Horse) or a Vault.
salto.
6.	Execution errors such as bent knees, bent arms, bad posture or
body position, poor rhythm, poor amplitude, etc. are listed in Articles
9.2 and 9.3 and are always deducted according to the degree of
error or deviation from what is considered perfect performance.
7.	Execution errors such as bending the arms, legs or body are
categorized as follows:
Small Error:	
8.	For strength hold or simple hold positions on any apparatus, angular deviations from the perfect hold position define the magnitude
of the technical error and the corresponding technical deduction:
	 up to 15°	
		Examples:
		 Ejemplos:
29
Petite faute		
a)	Deviations in hold positions of 30° and greater will receive a
large deduction from the E-jury. In addition, deviations of 45°
and greater will lead to the non recognition of the element by
the D-jury.
9.	A press from a static strength element that did not have its difficulty recognized for any reason will also not have its difficulty
recognized.
10. If the preceding strength hold element has received a deduction
for incorrect position, then the same deduction up to a maximum
of 0.30 points applies again to a press from that strength hold element if it is determined that the press has been simplified thereby.
This interpretation is intended only for circumstances where a high
position or a technically poor hold makes the subsequent press
easier (i.e. not for presses from faulty L sits, false grips, or for
time of hold positions). This deduction only applies to a high angle
deduction being applied to both elements connected by strength..
11. Technical deductions for angular deviation from the perfect end
position can also apply to swinging skills. In most cases the perfect
end position is defined as a perfect handstand, or during Pommel
Horse circles, as a perfect cross support or perfect side support
position. For swinging elements the following applies:
a)	On Floor Exercise, Pommel Horse, Rings, Parallel Bars and
Horizontal Bar, swing elements are often expected to be
performed through rather than to an exact handstand otherwise the rhythm of an exercise might be interrupted. For that
reason a small angular deviation of up to 15° from an exact
handstand is permitted up to the conclusion of the element. A
small deduction is taken if the deviation from the handstand
is between 16° and 30°.
b)	On Pommel Horse, circles and most elements must be performed in, from, or to within 15° of a perfect cross or side
support position. The appropriate angular deviation deduction
is taken each time the error occurs during an exercise. This
means that the E - Jury would deduct for each skewed circle,
whereas the D - Jury would not recognize the element if it
deviates from the correct support orientation more than 45°
for the greater portion of the element.
12. During swing elements which pass through or end in handstand
(see additional rule Art. 15.2 for Horizontal Bar), deviations from
the correct position will be penalized as follows:
up to 15º	
Large error and non-recognition (D jury).
30
Note: Deviations in end positions for swinging elements of 45°
and greater (or for twisting elements, of 90° and greater) will
receive a large deduction from the E - Jury and will not be
recognized by the D-jury. However, in some cases, it may be
possible for an element with incomplete twist to be recognized
as a lower value element in accordance with the amount of
twist correctly completed.
13. On Rings, during swings to a hold position, the shoulders may
not rise above the final hold position. If the shoulders rise above
the final hold position, the deduction is:
Non-recognition	
up to 15º.
14. All hold elements must be held for a minimum of 2 seconds measured from the moment that a complete stop position has been
reached. Elements that are not held will receive large deduction
and will not be recognized by the D-jury.
2 seconds 	
Less 2 seconds 	
Non stop 	
large error and non-recognition.
15. Deductions for poor landings are listed in Article 9.4. A correct
landing is a prepared landing, not one which happens by luck to
end in a standing position. An element should be performed with
such excellent technique that the gymnast has fully completed it
and has had time to reduce rotation and/or extend the body prior
16. Landings & Dismounts on the Feet without Deduction.
	 For safety reasons a gymnast may land or dismount with their feet
apart (enough to properly join their heels together) upon landing
from any salto. The gymnast must complete the landing by bringing his heels together without lifting and moving the front of his
feet. This is done by raising the heels off the mat and joining them
together without lifting the front of the feet. The arms must also be
in complete control with no unnecessary swings.
17. Additional technical deductions are listed in Article 9.4 and specifically for each apparatus in the appropriate Chapter.
31
Action (Without steps, hops, or arm
swings)
Result
Landing with feet slightly apart and gymnast lifts heels and joins both heels together without lifting and moving the front of his
feet
talons
pieds
Landing with feet slightly apart or less than
shoulder width apart and gymnast picks up
a foot moving both feet together, OR does
not join both feet together by lifting only
the heels
0.1 deduction for
landing with feet
apart
pied
Landing with feet more than shoulder width 0.3 deduction for
apart, AND gymnast picks up one foot mov- landing with feet
ing both feet together, OR does not join apart
both feet together
Note:
-	 All other execution deductions (those while in the flight phase of
a salto or for lack of extension before landing) must always be
considered in addition to the landing requirements noted above.
Nota:
Article 9.3 Expectations for Compositional Exercise Construction
1.	The expectations for Compositional exercise construction are those
aspects of an exercise that define the essence of our expectations
and understanding of a gymnastics performance on each apparatus; such things as using the full floor area; swinging without
stops; no repetition; etc. These are specifically defined for each
apparatus in the appropriate chapter.
2.	Exercise construction errors include, but are not restricted to, the
following:
a)	 Gratuitous separation of legs (medium error = 0.3 p. E-jury):
i.	 The gymnast may not perform elements with a separation
of legs that serves no useful purpose or that detracts from
the aesthetics of a performance. For example, on Parallel
Bars a Stützkehre or a pirouette may not be performed
with legs apart; on Horizontal Bar and Rings, elements
may not be performed with a back-forward separation of
the legs; on Rings, crosses, swallows, and handstands
may not be performed with a separation of the legs; etc.
Most elements permitted or required to be performed with
separated legs are listed in the Difficulty Tables.
b)	Repetition of elements
i.	 Repeating of elements is permitted but they cannot receive credit for difficulty or connection points. However,
they are evaluated normally by the E-jury.
32
c)	Layaways, empty and intermediate swings (medium or large
error = 0,3 or 0,5 by the E-jury):
i. 	 An empty swing is a swing at the end of which no element
is performed or no new support or hang position or grip
is achieved (medium error by the E-jury).
ii. 	An intermediate swing is two successive empty swings
(large error by the E-jury).
iii. 	Layaways are back swings in support or in upper arm
support that simply reverse direction and swing back
down in or to a lower hang or support position (also if
accompanied by a grip change) (medium error by the
E-jury).
d)	Lowering of Legs on Swings to Handstands.
	 The table below shows the actions to be taken for lowering of
the legs during swings to handstand:
D
la position originale
E-Jury & D-Jury action
Angle Deviation from
original position
E-Jury & D-Jury action
Angle Deviation from
original position
-0.1 petite
-0.1 small
-0.1 small
-0.3 medium
-0.3 medium
-0.5 large
-0.5 large
-0.5 large & non-recognition
-0.5 large & non-recognition
3.	Exercise Construction stipulations and deductions that apply specifically to each apparatus are listed in the appropriate Chapters.
Article 9.4 E - Jury deductions
These deductions are to be applied on all apparatus and Floor
Exercise by the E-jury when the corresponding error is made. See
Sections 10 to 15 for additional errors and deductions specific to
each apparatus.
aparato.
33
Fautes
Petite
0.10
0.30
0.50
Non-distinct positions (tuck,
pike, straight).

Adjust or correct hand or
grip position each time.

Touching apparatus or floor
with legs or feet.

apart.

Saltos with knees or legs
apart.

Legs apart on landing.
1.0
Loss of balance during any
landing with no fall or hand
total for steps and hops).
grand pas
des mains
jury “D”

≤ shoulder
width
> shoulder
width
≤ shoulder
width
> shoulder
width

Large step
or hop or
touching
the mat
with 1 or 2
hands
saltos).
1.0 and non
the "D” Jury
0.50

1.0
Media
0.30
1.0

Fall during any landing
without feet contacting mat
first.
0.10
Fall or support with 1 or 2
hands during any landing.
Other aesthetic errors.

Slight
small step
or hop, 0.1

Atypical straddle.

Poor posture or body position or postural corrections
in end positions.
Unsteadiness, minor adjustment of feet, or excessive
arm swings on landing.

Large
0.50
Interruption of exercise
without fall.

Hitting apparatus or floor.

position finale
Medium
0.30

Gymnast touched but not
assisted by spotter during

Small
0.10
Deductions for aesthetic and execution errors
Walking in handstand or
hopping (each step or hop).
Error

34

0.10
0.30
0.50

(2 s.).

1,0

le jury D
Deviations in swings to or
through handstand or in
Angular deviations from
perfect hold positions.
Press from poorly held
positions.
Incomplete twists.
Lack of height or amplitude
on salto and flight elements.
Medium
0.30
Large
0.50
>45° and nonrecognition
up to 15°
recognition
deductions equivalent to those for the hold
position are repeated

Additional or intermediate
hand support.

Strength with swing and
vice versa.

Interruption in upward
movement.
Lowering of legs on elements to a handstand (from
original position)
Unsteadiness in or fall from
handstand.
recognition

viceversa.

less 2 sec.
non stop and
non- recognition

swing or

Fall from or onto apparatus.
1,0
Intermediate swing or
layaway.
half or
layaway
Assistance by spotter in the
completion of an element.
Lack of extension in preparation for landing.

Other technical errors.


1.0 and non –
recognition by
the “D” Jury

whole

Two or more attempts at a
hold or strength part.
0.50

Duration of hold parts (2 sec.).
Media
0.30
up to 30°
0.10
Deductions for Technical errors
Small
0.10
Error
1,0

PART III
Apparatus

- Pommel Horse
- Rings

- Vault

- Parallel Bars

- Horizontal Bar

36
Dimensions: 12 m. x 12 m.
Dimensions: 12 m. x 12 m.
A Floor Exercise is composed predominantly of acrobatic elements
combined with other gymnastic elements such as strength and
balance parts, elements of flexibility, handstands, and choreographic
combinations all forming a harmonious rhythmic exercise which is
performed utilizing the entire floor exercise area (12 m x 12 m).
Article 10.2 Content and Construction
Article 10.2.1 Information about Exercise Presentation
1.	The gymnast must begin his Exercise within the floor area, from
a still stand legs together. The exercise and evaluation begin with
the first movement of the feet of the gymnast.
2.	The gymnast must include only elements that he can perform with
complete safety and with a high degree of aesthetic and technical
mastery.
3.	Additional execution and exercise construction expectations are:
a)	The exercise must occur entirely within the floor area. Elements
initiated outside of the floor area will be evaluated in the normal
fashion by the E-Jury but will not be recognized by the D-Jury.
i.	 The space available for Floor Exercise is delineated by
boundary lines or colour separations. Lines are considered
to be a part of the floor area. The gymnast may step onto
the line, but not over the line or on the outside colour.
ii.	Going outside of the marked floor area will be controlled by
2 line judges who sit diagonally opposite each other near
the FX area. Each line judge observes the 2 boundary lines
nearest him. When line violations occur, the line judge must
advise the D1 judge in writing, using the following criteria:
- 	 Landing or touching with one foot or one hand outside
the floor area = 0,10.
- 	Touching with feet, hands, foot and hand or with any
other part of the body outside of the floor area = 0,30.
- 	 Landing directly outside the floor area = 0,30.
- 	 Elements initiated outside the floor area have no value.
The D1 judge will take the appropriate deduction from the
final score.
iii.	If the gymnast has stepped outside of the floor area, steps
required to return back into the area are not deducted.
37
b)	The duration of the Floor Exercise is a maximum of 70 seconds
which will be verified by a timer. There is no minimum time.
The Time Judge will give an audible warning signal at 60 seconds and again at 70 seconds to indicate the maximum time
prescribed to the exercise. The time is measured from the first
movement of the feet of the gymnast through to the dismount,
which must end in a standing position with legs together. If
the exercise does not comply with the prescribed time, the
timer will signal the judge D1 who will take the corresponding
deduction from the Final Score.
c)	The full floor area must be used. There is no limit regarding
the amount of times a diagonal may be used in succession for
acrobatic elements. However, the gymnast must go to and/or
from each corner or a 0.3 neutral deduction by the D-jury will
be taken once during the exercise.
d)	Pauses of two seconds or longer before acrobatic series or
elements are not permitted.
e)	Each acrobatic element or series must end in a visibly controlled landing before continuing to a non-acrobatic element.
Uncontrolled momentary landings during such transitions are
not permitted.
f)	 Dive rolls must show a momentary support of both hands; that
is, these may not be performed without hand support or with
contact only on the back of the hands.
g)	The exercise must end with an acrobatic element that lands
with both feet together.
h)	A gymnast must not use simple steps to arrive in the corner.
Simple steps occur when a gymnast repositions himself on
the floor area without any choreography (turning ≥180 degree,
4.	For a full list of errors and deductions governing Exercise Presentation, see Section 9 and the summary of deductions in Articles 9.4
and 10.3.
Article 10.2.2 Information about the D score
1.	The Element Groups (EG) are:
I. 	Non-acrobatic elements.
II. 	Acrobatic elements forward (saltos and handsprings) and
fwd. rollout elements (no salto).
III. 	Acrobatic elements backward (saltos and handsprings),
and Arabian elements.
2.	The dismount cannot be from Element Group I.
3.	For seniors, a double salto element is required in the exercise and
must be inside the 10 counting elements.
i)	 The deduction for aesthetic and execution errors in the saltos
is per element not for every salto included in the element.
38

4.	Information about Difficulty and elements group:
a)	Acrobatic elements can be connected but retain their independent values.
b)	For floor exercise, one element can fulfill only one Element
Group requirement. If one element is executed as dismount
(Element Group II, or III), it can fulfill only Dismount Group
requirement, and the gymnast must include one more element from the same Element Group as the dismount inside
the exercise in order to receive the respective Element Group
points. The element used for the dismount is the first of five
counted within a specific element group, except in the instance
of basic repetition.
c)	All Arabian elements are in the group of acrobatic elements
backward, Example Arabian double front ½ = same as double
back 1/1 (D value). The following Arabian elements (Jump
bwd. with ½ t. to double salto fwd.) have the same value and
Code box as the bwd. double salto element with the same
amount of twisting: Arabian dbl. str. ½ (Penev), Arabian dbl.
str. (Tamayo), and Arabian dbl. str. 1/1 (Hypolito).
5.	Information about connections (CV).
- Connections can be awarded on both sides of one element
and is not necessary to be inside 10 counting elements (but no
- D or higher + B or C = +0.1, D or higher + D or higher = +0.2
- (No connection for Counter Saltos, example Double salto bwd.
1/1 to salto fwd. 1/1).
- Limit of 2 connections total in an exercise.
6.	Additional information and regulations:
a)	3/2 salto elements with reception by and then spring from the
hands are not permitted.
b)	Saltos rollout and jumps to prone position are not permitted
for value.
c)	All permitted elements that finish with a rollout or finish in front
support position are listed in the Difficulty Tables. For safety
reasons, no new such elements are permitted.
a pecho.
d)	Unless otherwise indicated in the Difficulty Tables, circle and
flair elements have the same value and identification number.
Wende swings with legs apart are not permitted.
e)	Unlisted strength holds with straddled legs are not permitted.
f)	Elements involving two strength parts for one Code value
require a stop position in both strength parts to receive the
listed value, a lower value WILL be awarded if a stop occurs
for only one of the strength parts. Example: Manna (1 s.) and
press handstand (no stop)= C value for the Manna.
39
g)	All circles/flairs begin and end in front support.
7.	Special repetitions:
a)	A maximum of 2 strength elements (including strength handstands) may be performed in an exercise for content value.
	 Elements I.1 to I.48 are considered to be strength elements,
except:
		 - Element I.19 - Handstand (2 sec).
		 - Element I.31 - ½ or 1/1 turn in handstand or to handstand.
b)	A maximum of 2 circle, flair, or Russian value parts may be
performed in an exercise for content value.
excepto:
8.	For a further list of regulations governing non-recognition of elements and other aspects of the “D score”, see Section 7 and the
summary of deductions in Article 7.6.
h)	No extra elements may be added before or after element I.94
(Flair to handstand hopping backward handstand pirouettes
and back to flair) for an increase in value.
	 Example: addition of a spindle before I.94 will NOT increase the
value. The MTC has applied a principle where only acrobatic
elements can be awarded more than a D value.
i)	 All Japanese handstands require closing of the legs.
40
Jury E
0.30

mains
0.50

salto
Medium
0.30
Insufficient height in acrobatic
elements.
Lack of flexibility during static
elements.
Error
Roll-out elements without hand
support.
On back of
hands
Large
0.50
Without
support

Uncontrolled momentary landings (also in transitions).

Simple steps or transitions to
arrive to the corners.

Jump to prone landing after
salto

0.10
0.30
0.50
>2 - 5 sec.
>5 sec.
Error
Exercise longer than 70 sec.
Non-acrobatic or illegal dismount (rolls).
Small
0.10
Medium
0.30
Large
0.50
>2 - 5 sec.
> 5 sec.
Element not recognized by D-jury
Landing or touching with one
foot or one hand outside the
floor area.
0.10
Media
0.30

Touching with feet, hands, foot
and hand or with any other
part of the body outside of the
floor area.

Landing directly outside the
floor area.

0.10
Media
0.30
0.50

No pass to and/or from each
corner)

Seniors only)

0.50
D Jury
Jury D
Small
0.10
Pause 2 sec. or more before
element or acrobatic series.

E Jury

0.10

Article 10.3 Specific Deductions for Floor Exercise.
Elements initiated outside the
floor area.
No value
41
A = 0,1
C = 0,3
B = 0,2
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 V-sit (2 s.).
	 From hdst. lower to L-sit or strad. L-sit (2 s.).
	 From stand, Swiss press to hdst. (2 s.).
	 V-sit with legs horiz. (2 s.).
(Manna)
	 Piked body, str. arm or str. body, bent arm press 	 V-sit (2 s) and press to hdst. (2 s.) also with strad. 	 Manna (2 s.) and press to hdst. (2 s.) also with
to hdst. with legs together (2 s.).
legs.
strad. legs.
	 Rock to hdst. from prone position (2 s.).
	 Swiss press from split, L-sit, strad. L-sit or front
sup. (2 s.).
	 Handstand (2 s.).
	 From Manna (2 s.), turn over (dislocation) to
handstand (2 s.).
(2 s.).
(2 s.).
	 Press or lower or swing to Japanese hdst. (2 s.). 	 From split press to Japanese handstand (2 s.).

A = 0,1
C = 0,3
B = 0,2
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 ½ or 1/1 turn in handstand or to handstand.	
 	 From straddled support lever (2 s.) press hdst. 	 From support lever 2 s. press handstand (2 s.). 	 From Swallow 2 s. press to Japanese hdst. (2 s.).
	
(2 s.).

	 From L-sit, etc., turn over bwd. to stand.

	 Swallow (2 s.).

	 Endo roll to handstand (2 s.).
phase with straddle.
- May straddle the legs without deduction to reach the handstand position in the final phase of the element.
43
A = 0,1
C = 0,3
B = 0,2
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 From stand or rear support, push off 1 foot
through hdst. or back walkover.

	 Cross or side split (stop required).

mains (2 s.).
	
Any standing scale with 180° straddle, no hand
hold (2 s.).

	 Forward walkover.
44
A = 0,1
C = 0,3
B = 0,2
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Jump bwd. to front support.
	
Jump bwd. with pike-stretch or with 1/1 turn to
front support.

	 Butterfly with 2/1 twist.

(Endo)

	 Butterfly.

	 Butterfly with 1/1 twist fwd. or bwd.
(Tong Fei)
	 Breakdance variations.
	 2 circles or flairs.
	
Circles or flair to handstand.
	
Flair or circle to hdst. continue to flair or circle. 	 Flair hopping with 360° t. bwd. thr. hdst and back
to flair (2 hops).
saltos).
45
A = 0,1
C = 0,3
B = 0,2
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	
Lower from hdst. to flair or circle.
	
	
Flair with ½ spindle.
	
	
Flair with >270 spindle (in 2 circles) directly to
	
Flair with 1/1 spindle (in 2 circles).
handstand.
	
	
108
renv.
	
Flair with ½ spindle to handstand.
	
	
Flair with > 270º spindle (in 2 circles) directly
to handstand and continue to circle or flair.
	
	
Russian wendeswing with 360° or 540°.
	
	
Russian wendeswing with 720° or 900°.
	
	
Russian wendeswing with 1080° or more.
	
46
A = 0,1
C = 0,3
B = 0,2
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	
Roll bwd. through hdst. with ½ t.
	
	
Roll bwd. with hop 1/1 t. through hdst.
	
128.	
132
133.	
134.	
139.	
47
A = 0,1
C = 0,3
B = 0,2
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Neck or head spring w. ½ t. to hdst. or 1/1 t. to
rear support.
	
Handspring salto fwd. tuck (Marinich style).
	
	 Forward handspring or flyspring.
(Morandi)
	 Dive roll.
	Tigre.
	
Jump with 1/1 twist to fwd. hdsp.
	
15. 	
	 Salto fwd. tucked or piked.
20.	Salto avant tendu.
	 Salto fwd. stretched.
	Salto fwd. str. to front support.
	
Double salto fwd. tucked.
	 Double salto fwd. piked.
48
A = 0,1
C = 0,3
B = 0,2
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Aerial walkover fwd.
26.	
27.	
28.	
	 Double salto fwd. tucked with ½ t.
	 Double salto fwd. piked with ½ t.
	 Salto tucked and piked ½ t.
	 Salto tucked with 1/1 t.
34.	
36.	
	 Salto fwd. str. with ½ t.
	 Salto fwd. str. with 1/1 t.
	 Salto fwd. str. with 5/2 t.
	 Salto fwd. str. with 3/1 t.
	 Salto fwd. str. with 2/1 t.
(Shirai 2)
	 Salto tucked 3/2 t.
	
Salto fwd. str. with 3/2 t.
	
46.	
47.	
48.	
49
A = 0,1
C = 0,3
B = 0,2
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	
Salto fwd. t. or p. to front support.
	 Salto fwd. t., p or str. with 1/1 t. to front support.
	
	 Double salto fwd. tucked with 1/1 turn.
56.	
59.	
	 Jump fwd. with ½ t. to dbl. salto bwd. t. or p.
(Deferr)
	
	
50
A = 0,1
C = 0,3
B = 0,2
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Salto backwards tucked or piked.
	 Salto backwards stretched.
	 Double salto bwd. tucked.
	 Double salto bwd. t. or piked with 1/1 t. Also
Arabian double t. or p. ½ t.
	 Double salto bwd. tucked with 3/1 t.
(Ri Jong Song)
G
	 Salto backwards tucked or piked w. ½ t.
9.	
salto arr. tendu avec 3/2 t. et salto av. groupé. 	 Double salto bwd. tucked with 5/2 t.
	 Arabian double tucked or piked or double salto 	 Double salto bwd. t. with 3/2 t. or Salto bwd. str. 	 Doble mortal atrás agrupado con 5/2 g.
bwd. t. or p. with ½ t.
3/2 to fwd. salto tucked
	
Back handspring.
	
Flic flac.
	
	
Tempo.
	 Double salto bwd. piked.
16.	
	 Triple salto bwd. tucked.
(Liukin)
H
19.	
	
Salto backwards tucked w. 3/2 t. .
	
	 Salto bwd. str. with 3/2 t.
	 Salto bwd. str. with 5/2 t.
	
Salto bwd. str. with 7/2 t.
	
24.	
51
A = 0,1
C = 0,3
B = 0,2
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	
Salto bwd. str. with 1/1 t.
	
	
Salto bwd. str. with 2/1 t.
	
	
Salto bwd. str. with 3/1 t.
	
29.	
	 Salto bwd. str. with 4/1 t.
31. .
32.	
33.	
34.	
35.	
36.	
	 Jump bwd. with ½ t. to roll fwd.
42.	
	 Jump bwd. with ½ t. to handspring forward.
	 Jump bwd. with ½ t. to salto fwd. t. or p. to f. sup.
	
Double salto straddled with 1/1 t.
	
	 Salto bwd. str. with 2/1 t and salto bwd piked.
(Lou Yun)
(Kolyvanov)
52
A = 0,1
C = 0,3
B = 0,2
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
49.	
50.	
51.	
	 Double salto bwd. stretched.
	 Arabian Jump bwd. to dbl. salto fwd. str. or 	
Double salto bwd. str. with 3/2 t. or arabian
double salto bwd. stretched with ½ t.
Jump bwd. to dbl. salto fwd. str. with 1/1 t.
Tamayo
55.	
55.	
57.	
	
Double salto bwd. str. with 2/1 t.
	 Double salto bwd. stretched with 1/1 t. or arabian 	
Jump bwd. to dbl. salto fwd. str. with ½ t.
61.	
63.	
64.	
	 Double salto bwd. str. with 5/2 t.
G
67.	
68.	
69.	
	 Double salto bwd. str. with 3/1 t.
(Shirai 3)
H
53
Section 11: Pommel Horse
Height: 105 cm from top of mat, 115 cm from the floor.
A contemporary Pommel Horse exercise is characterized by a variety
of support positions on all parts of the horse, permitting different
types of circular swings with legs apart and together, single leg
swings and/or scissors, and swings through the handstand position
with or without turns. All elements must be executed with swing and
without the slightest interruption of the exercise. Strength and hold
elements are not permitted.
Article 11.2: Content and Construction
Article 11.2.1 Information about Exercise Presentation
1.	The gymnast must start his exercise from a standing position.
An approach step or hop is permitted. The evaluation begins the
moment the gymnast’s feet leave the floor.
2.	The gymnast must include only elements that he can perform with
complete safety and with a high degree of aesthetic and technical
mastery.
3.	Additional execution, technical and exercise construction expectations are:
a)	The exercise must consist exclusively of swings without visible
pauses or visible use of strength.
b)	Oblique positions during flair and circle work are not permitted.
Circles and flairs may be performed only in cross support or in
side support positions. Furthermore, all turning elements must
begin and end in either cross support or side support.
son:
c)	Ideally circles and flairs must be performed with complete
extension. Lack of amplitude in body position is deducted
as an individual deduction on for each element. Circles with
a slightly hollow position are permitted. Hip breaks during
individual elements in an exercise should be deducted as
separate technical errors on each circle or flair.
d)	Wendeswings must be performed with legs together. Straddled
wendeswings are considered atypical and are deducted appropriately.
e)	During scissors and single leg swings, the gymnast must
demonstrate a significant elevation of his hips and a large
54
coller.
separation of the legs.
f)	 Handstand elements must be achieved with completely straight
arms and without any interruption of swing or obvious use of
strength.
g)	In flair or circle to handstand dismounts and elements returning
to flairs or circles (or support), execution deductions for hesitation, strength, bent arms, lowering of the hips, and unsteadiness must be considered on the rise to the handstand, within
the pirouette, the lower from the handstand, and the extension
of the flairs or circles upon completion of the element. There is
no deduction for bending of the hips on the rise to handstand.
h)	A dismount must normally cross the body of the horse and land
in cross stand facing along the long axis of the horse while
landing adjacent to the last hand support position.
i)	 A simple handstand dismount must cross the horse in order to
be recognized. A handstand dismount does not have to cross
the horse provided that It includes a turn of at least 270º from
the side support or 360º from the cross support.
j)	 Expectations for scissor to handstand elements:
-	 The gymnast is expected to swing to handstand without
strength or hesitation, with hips stretched throughout.
-	 A scissor to handstand with pronounced hip bend and
strength should receive these two separate deductions
from the E jury.
-	 Scissors to handstands demonstrating swing with strength
and/or lowering of the hips or legs will be deducted by the
E jury.
-	 All scissors to handstand require the legs to close.
k)	Clarifications concerning evaluation for Li Ning Scissor to
handstand performed with hand(s) stepping errors:
-	 Step down off pommel with one hand with return to the
single pommel = D value (D jury) and -0.3 + other execution errors (E jury) for uncontrolled handstand support.
-	 Step down off pommel with one hand with no return to the
single pommel= D value (D jury) and -0.5 + other execution errors (E jury) for uncontrolled handstand support.
-	 Step down off pommel with two hands= no value (D jury)
and -0.5 or -1.0 (dependent on continuance of exercise
or fall) + other execution errors (E jury).
	 Note: All other scissors to handstand with support of both hands
on the leather = no value (D jury) and -0.5 or -1.0 (dependent
on continuance of exercise or fall) + other execution errors (E
jury).
E).
55
l) All dismounts other than handstand dismounts must be executed with the body at a minimum angle of 30º above the
shoulder horizontal line before landing. For angles lower than
30º, deductions will be applied according to the specific errors
and deductions table for pommel horse, Art. 11.3.
m) If a gymnast believes he did not receive value for his dismount,
he may repeat any dismount for value (one time only) within
30 seconds of completing the original attempt. If the original
dismount received a large deduction, and the dismount is
repeated, the large deduction must be increased to -1.0 by
the E jury.
4.	For a full list of errors and deductions governing Exercise Presentation, see Section 9 and the summary of deductions in Articles 9.4
and 11.3.
III.	Transports inclus Krolls, Tong Fei, Wu Guoniang, Roth
IV.	Sorties.
Article 11.2.2 Information about the “D score”
1.	The Element Groups (EG) are:
I. 	 Single leg swings and scissors.
II. 	Circle and flairs, with and/or without spindles and handstands, Kehrswings, Russian wendeswings, flops and
combined elements.
Guonian, Roth and Traveling Spindles.
IV. 	Dismounts.
2.	Additional information and regulations:
a)	General
a.1)	Unless otherwise indicated elements on the leather have
the same value as those performed on two pommels.
a)	General
a.2)	Unless otherwise indicated all ½ turns (Czechkehres,
Stöckli and reverse Stöckli, double Swiss), have the same
value.
a.3)	Unless otherwise indicated, each element is defined as
occurring within one structure and ending when a new
structure is initiated, as follows (Exception: the combined
i.	 A hop element ends at the completion of the hop or
series of hops.
ii.	 A circle or flair element ends when it changes to the
other.
iii.	 A spindle element ends when the spindle action stops.
termina.
iv.	 A front support element (wendeswing) ends when the
v.	 Travel elements in cross support end when the travel
action or the cross support position is either interrupted by a circle or some other element or is ended
in some other way.
vi.	 For difficulty recognition purposes, travelling elements
can be considered finished as soon as the travel is
56
facial.
b)	Cercles
completed, front support position with both hands on
the applicable part of the horse.
vii.	Magyar & Sivado may share a common circle connecting them and receive D+D difficulty. To receive
credit for an A value circle between the two travels,
the A value circle must be completed fully from front
support to front support.
viii.	In the Code of Points Belenki, Urzica, and Moguilny
(EG III) may begin from cross support (also facing
out) minus 90º on first turn AND final turn, with travel
from one end to the other
a.4)	From side sup. on 1 end., travel bwd. over both p. to
side sup. on the other end (3/3) in 2 circles w.- must be
completed with no pommels for D value.
a.5)	No partial value will be given to any travel element with a
fall. Example: Magyar travel with fall after the first pommel
while attempting to continue the travel action will receive
a.6)	All Sohn and Bezugo type elements from a stand (and not
from a circle element) will be valued two letters lower than
the value from the listed element in the Code of Points.
a.7)	A Russian Wendeswing to a dismount beginning in cross
support facing out must complete Russian(s) as listed
before the Wende to receive full dismount value.
a.8)	A Wu Guonian requires a minimum 360° of body turn to be
completed with one or two hands between the pommels.
a.9)	Tong Fei elements can be performed with 4 different types
of start/end positions. Three of these types require a full
circle to be completed after the end position (side to cross,
cross to side, cross to cross) for value.
a.10) No partial value will be given to any travel element
with a fall. Example: Magyar travel with fall after the first
pommel while attempting to continue the travel action
will receive no value.
a.11) No additional elements may be added to increase the
value of these elements:
Belenki).
b)	Circles
b.1)	Unless otherwise indicated, all circle elements begin and
end in front support.
b.2)	Unless otherwise indicated, the value and identification
numbers of elements performed in circle or flair are identical. Such elements are illustrated at random in either the
III.70, Belenki).
b)	Molinos
57
circle or the flair positions throughout the Difficulty Tables.
This means Element II.28 can be performed several different ways:
•	 With legs together, side support 1/1 spindle inside
max 2 circles
•	 With legs straddled, side support 1/1 spindle inside
max 2 circles
•	 With legs straddled, side support 1/1 spindle inside
max 2 circles with hands outside of one pommel
molinos.
2 molinos.
b.3)	All basic circles in cross and side support (also on one
pommel) may end with a ¼ turn without changing the
structure or value of the element.
b.4)	Step up to pommel, with or without ¼ turn, is B value
Circle with ¼ turn on one pommel, and counts as start
to flop sequence (Element II.14).
c)	Handstand
c.1) 	There is no upgrade in value for turning within a handstand from scissors.
c.2)	 There is no upgrade in value for the performance of turning within a handstand (from circles or flairs) solely on the
pommels. Turning within a handstand requires a majority
use of the leather.
c.3)	When performing a 3/3 travel during a handstand (within
an exercise or dismount), “support” with one hand must
be shown on both ends of the horse to receive the 3/3
upgrade in value.
c.4)	Increases in Value for Handstands from circle or flairs:
1.	Circle or flair handstand dismounts.
“B”
“C”
OU transport* 3/3
C
D
D
E
Handstand
“D”
“B”
“C”
“D”
E
3/3 travel*
C
D
E
F
3/3 travel*
D
E
F
“B”
“C”
“D”
C
D
E
D
E
F
58
2.	Circle or Flair Handstand and lower to leg swing.
“B”
“C”
OU transport* 3/3
C
D
D
E
Handstand
“D”
“B”
“C”
E
3/3 travel*
C
D
F
3/3 travel*
D
E
“C”
“D”
C
D
E
transport* 3/3
D
E
transport 3/3
E
F
“D”
“B”
“C”
“D”
E
C
D
E
F
D
E
F
3. Circle or Flair Handstand and lower to circle/flair.
“B”
Handstand
“B”
“C”
“D”
Lower to circle/
C
D
E
F
3/3 travel*
D
E
G
3/3 travel
E
F
“B”
“C”
“D”
C
D
E
F
D
E
F
G
E
F
G
c.5)	Swing with strength and/or lowering of the hips or legs
in achieving handstands from a scissor or from circles or
flairs (including dismounts) will receive the value for the
element and element group (D jury) with E-jury deductions. However, if there is a large error, no recognition will
be given for the handstand or dismount. In the case of a
large deduction, the gymnast will receive a -0.5 deduction
and only deductions for aesthetic errors (legs, feet, bent
arms, touch horse, etc.). No deductions for strength or
angle will be applied.
c.6)	All scissors through handstand on one pommel require
a change of arm or pommel to receive value.
d.1)	It is possible to combine certain elements on a single
pommel. There are two types of such combined elements
listed in the Element Group II:
i.	 Flop type elements may include combinations of any
of the following on one pommel: circle in side support
(with or without ¼ turn), circle in cross support (with
or without ¼ turn), Direct Stöckli B, and/or Direct
Stöckli A; and may include a maximum of two of the
elements (flops) can only be of D or E value (i.e. 3
or 4 elements). As an exception a D flop performed
in flair = E, and an E flop performed in flair = F. Only
one such flop sequence may be used in an exercise
59
Russe
1 flop
	
for value.
The following examples illustrate this rule:
•	Circle on one pommel + DSB + DSB + DSA = E
value flop
ii.	 Combined sequences on one pommel of circle and/
or Stöckli A or B with Russian wendeswings. The
circle and/or Stöckli B can either precede or follow
the Russian wendeswings and must appear as 2
consecutive circle elements to be part of a two-flop
Combined Sequence. The DSA may only appear at
the end of the sequence. Only one of these combined
sequences may be used during an exercise.
2 flops
Russian
D
R18 or R27 (B)
E
R36 or R54 (C)
D
E
F
R72 or R90 (D)
F
G
R108 (E)
D
R108 (E)
pointage :
1 flop
	
2 flops
Rusas
D
1 flop
2 flops
E
D
E
F
E
F
F
G
R108 (E)
F
G
D
E
iii.	 In any case when a combined element is involved,
the gymnast will not have the right to make use of
the same element three times in direct succession.
iv.	 Flop and combined elements must be separated
by minimum one circle with one hand off of the one
pommel
v.	 A DSB is considered finished in side support frontways on one pommel.
d.2)	No other double elements will be credited for higher
value. For example: 2 circles or 2 DSB’s in any position
receive credit only for the first circle or DSB and no value
or recognition for the second.
e) Spindles
e.1)	Spindles in EG II in cross or side support with legs together or flair must be performed within a maximum 2
circles (3 front support positions after the original start
position) for D value.
e.2) There are two D value 1/1 Spindles (EG II) in the Code
of Points:
•	 Any cross support 1/1 spindle within max. 2 circles.
(also with 1/3, ½ or 2/3 travel) (Magyar)- Element II.34.
	 Both may be performed in the same exercise.
60
	 Exemple 1
Jury D
Jury E
Action
t. 3/3
Chute
en
permis
le
IV +0.5
-0.0
Jury D
Jury E
	 Exemple 2
f)	 Dismounts
f.1)	 Pommel Horse is the only apparatus where a dismount
may be repeated (one time only) if the gymnast determines he may not have received credit because of a fall or
a large deduction. This must be done within the allowable
time. If the gymnasts steps off the podium (this includes
the stairs), the exercise is terminated.
f.2)	 In the case of a repeated dismount, the gymnast has 30
seconds to remount the horse and perform any type of
dismount of his choice for value and EG IV.
f.3)	 Examples of repeating a PH dismount are:
	 Example 1
D Jury
evaluation
E Jury
evaluation
Falls while attempting the
handstand
EG IV
Successfully
repeats
St.
Handstand
270° t. 3/3 with
Action
to
Handstand
Repeated
to
3/3 dismount
within the time
-1.0 and any
deductions
prior to the action of falling
3/3
D value (0.4)
and +0.5
EG IV
-0.0
Repite
con
-0.0
D Jury
evaluation
E Jury
evaluation
	 Example 2
Action
t. 3/3
les
permis.
IV +0.5
son:
Action
to
Handstand
with large deviation
EG IV
de -1.0 (total)
Repeated
to
3/3 dismount
within the time
Successfully
repeats
St.
Handstand
450° t. 3/3 with
-0.0 deduction
E value (0.5)
and +0.5
EG IV
-0.5 (lowering
legs) and
any aesthetic
deductions
-0.5
y
de
The -0.5
(lowering
legs) must
be changed
to -1.0 for a
fall plus any
deductions
viewed on
the second
attempt.
Repite
con
61
	 Exemple 3
	 Example 3
Action
sortie: Russe
permis.
Jury D
Jury E
V +0.5
Action
Dismount attempt
Falls at 900°
Repeated
Dismount
within the time
Successfully
dismount with
C.
D Jury
evaluation
E Jury
evaluation
No value
-1.0 and any
deductions
prior to the action of falling
D value (0.4)
and +0.5
EG IV
-0.1 for leg
separation
Repite
con
de
	 In Example 3, the judge cannot always determine if the first
Russians are a dismount attempt.
3. Special repetitions:
a)	A maximum of two (3/3) cross support travels (forwards and/
or backwards) are permitted during the exercise. This rule
applies to the following six travels ONLY:
•	 III.45 Travel fwd.in cross support with support on leather,
pommel, pommel, leather(3/3) (1-2-4-5), C value.
•	 III.46 Any other travel fwd. in cross support to other end
(3/3) (Magyar), D value.
•	 III.47 3/3 cross support travel fwd. with hop (Driggs), E
value
•	 III.51 Fr. cr. sup. on end, tr. fwd. in 2 circles to 1st p., to 2nd
p., with ¼ turn to side sup. on other end (3/3) (Bilozerchev),
C value.
•	 III.57 Travel bwd.in cross sup with support on leather,
pommel, pommel, leather(3/3) (5-4-2-1), C value.
•	 III.58 Any other travel bwd. in cross support to other end
	 i.e. Nin Reyes type elements (3/3 travel with spindle) are NOT
considered with this rule.
b)	A maximum of two Russian Wendeswings are permitted for
value in an exercise, including the dismount. Excluded from
the rule are flop/ Russian combinations on one pommel, Kroll
(III.81), Roth (III.82), Wu Guonian (III.83), and Tong Fei type
elements (III.75, 76, 87, 89) elements.
c)	A maximum of 2 handstand elements are permitted for value
in an exercise from circles, flairs, or scissors (not including the
dismount).
5.	For a further list of regulations governing non-recognition of elements and other aspects of the “D score”, see Section 7 and the
summary of deductions in Article 7.6.
62
Jury D
Faute
Petite
0.10
0.30
0.50
Article 11.3 Specific Deductions for Pommel horse
D Jury
Error
Non utilization of all 3 parts
of the horse.
Medium
0.30
Large
0.50
Petite
0.10
0.30
Handstand with visible
strength or bent arms.
Pausing or stopping in
handstand.
hanches
pas
reconnu.
Landing oblique or not facing out from the long axis
of horse.
Non handstand dismounts,
over shoulder horizontal
line.
(pieds).
0.50
Lack of amplitude in scissors and single leg swings.
Hip Breaks with circles.
pas
reconnu.
Medium
0.30
0.50
Media
0.30
molinos.
elements.
deviation >45
deviation
caballo.
Scissor to handstand with
Scissors to handstand
without closing the legs.
Lowering of legs on
elements to a handstand
(from original position)
Media
0.30
0.10
Unsteadiness in the handstand dismount, turning
problems.
reconnu.
Large
0.50
Lack of body extension
in circles or flairs. Each
element
Angular deviations in cross
support circles and travels.
0.10
Small
0.10
Extra ½ swing on mount
without a leg changing
sides.
Error
caballo.
E Jury
Jury E
Faute
Small
0.10
0.50
rec.
63
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Scissor forward.
l’ATR.
	 Double Scissor Fwd. with Travel Sideways
through Handstand.
	 Scissor fwd. w. ¼ t. through hstd. on 1 p., lower
to sup. w. strad. legs on the other arm.
(Li Ning)
	 Scissor forward with ½ t.
	 Scissor forward with hop swd. (also with 1/2 t.).
	 Tijera ad. con salto lateral (también con 1/2 g.). 	 Scissor fwd. with hop swd. from one end to the
other (3/3).
	 Scissor backward.
transport lateral.
	 Double scissor fwd. (¼ t. fwd. a. ¼ t. bwd.) with 	 Double scissor forward with hop sideways from
one end to the other (3/3).
(Mikulak)
	 Scissor backward with ½ turn.
21.	
	 Swing bwd. w. ¼ t. through hstd. on 1 p., lower
to sup. w. strad. legs on the other arm.
64
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Scissor fwd. 1/4 t. to hdst., 1/4 t. and straddle
down bwd on 1 arm on the other pommel.
	 Scissor bwd.with hop swd.(also with ½ t.).
	 Scissor bwd. with hop swd. from one end to the
other (1-2 to 4-5).
(1-2 a 4-5).
38.	
39.	
bwd on 1 arm on the other pommel.
	 Leg cut or undercut bwd. through hdst. and 	 Leg cut or undercut bwd. through hdst. and
lower to flair or circle.
lower to support w. strad. legs.
65
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Circle in side support on 1 pommel.
	 Any circle or flair in side support.
	 Circles in cross support frontways on end.
	 Circles in cross support rearways on end.
	 Circles in cross support between the pommels.
extremo.
	 Circle with support outside pommels or between
the pommels.
66
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	
	
	 Any side support 1/1 spindle w. legs straddle 	 Any side support 1/1 spindle with hand support to 	 Side support, 1/1 spindle with both pommels
inside max. 2 circles.
the other side and return (max. 2 flairs or circles).
between the hands (flair or circle).
o molinos).
	 Cross support on end, ½ spindle.
side support.
33.	
	 Any cross support 1/1 spindle within max. 2 	 Cross support, 1/1 spindle with hands between the
circles. (also with ⅓, ½ or 2/3 travel).
pommels max. 2 circles. (also with ⅓ travel).
(Magyar)
37.	
	 Flair or circle through hdst. and lower to sup. w. 	 Flair or circle through hdst. (with or without ½
strad. legs.
t.) and lower to flair or circle.
44.	
	 1/1 spindle w. legs straddle or together on the
pommels inside max. 2 circles.
	 Flair with hop travel bwd. through hdst. and 	 Flair with hop travel bwd. through hdst. and lower
lower to sup. w. straddle legs.
to circles or flairs.
67
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Reverse Stöckli or DSA strad. through hdst. and
lower to sup. w. strad. legs or circle.
	
through hdst., 3/3 travel (fwd.- bwd), 360º turn
to flairs.
	
	 Pase dorsal adelante con ½ g. (doble dorsal). 	 Kehrswing bwd. hop with ½ t. on the pommels.
	 Kehr with 1/1 turn on 1 pommel.
(Sohn)
	 Kehr with 270º t. on 1 p. (Sohn technique) from 	 Kehr with 270º t. on 1 p. (Sohn technique) from
cross to side support.
side to cross support.
68
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
75.	
	
Reverse Stöckli with 270° t. to 1 pommel.
	
	 Wendeswing fwd. w. ½ t. to sup. fw. on the end, 	 Stöckli invertida, 180º o 270º de giro en un
from side support using 1 or 2 pommels.
molino.
	
Reverse Stöckli with 360° t. on 1 pommel.
	
	 Double Swiss.
	
	
arcos.
	 Czechkehre on the leather or pommels.
87.	
69
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Russian wendeswing with 180° or 270°.
	 Russian wendeswing with 360° or 540°.
	 Russian wendeswing with 720° or 900°.
	
Russian wendeswing with 1080° or more.
	
	
On the leather , Russian wendeswing with 360° 	
On the leather, Russian wendeswing with 720° 	
On the leather, Russian wendeswing with
	
On the leather, Russian wendeswing with 180°,
1080° or more.
or 270° also with travel.
	
	
	
Russian wendeswing with 180° or 270° on 1 	
Russian wendeswing with 360° or 540° on 1 	
720° or 900° Russian wendeswing on 1 pom- 	
1080º Russian wendeswing or more on 1
p. or between the pommels.
pommel or between the pommels.
mel or between the pommels.
pommel or between the pommels.
	
arcos.
70
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
EG III: Transports inclus Krolls, Tong Fei, Wu Guoniang, Roth et transport avec pivot. - Travel type elements, including Krolls, Tong Fei, Wu Guonian, Roth and Traveling Spindles - Desplazamientos, incluyendo
	 Circles with travel fwd. in side support (also with 	 Circles with travel fwd. in side support (3/3).
	 Circles with travel fwd. in side support (3/3),
	 From side sup. on 1 end., travel fwd. over both
hands between pommels.
lateral (3/3).
p. to sup. on other end (3/3) in 1 circle.
	 Circles with hop travel fwd. in side support.
	 Circles with hop tr. fwd. 2x in side support (3/3).
over both p. to sup. frontways on other end.
	 Circles with travel bwd. in side support.
	 Circles with travel bwd. in side support (3/3).
	 Circles with travel bwd. in side support (3/3),
hands between pommels.
	 From side sup. on 1 end., travel bwd. over both p.
lateral.
lateral (3/3).
to side sup. on the other end (3/3) in 2 circles w.
	 Circles with travel bwd. with hop 2x.
	 Circles with travel bwd. with hop.
	 From side support on one end, travel hop over 	 From side sup. beside the p., travel hop o. 2 p.
both p. to sup. frways on other end (1-2 to 4-5).
to sup. fwd on other end (1-1 to 5-5).
4-5).
(Yamawaki)
71
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
EG III: Transports inclus Krolls, Tong Fei, Wu Guoniang, Roth et transport avec pivot. - Travel type elements, including Krolls, Tong Fei, Wu Guonian, Roth and Traveling Spindles - Desplazamientos, incluyendo
(1/3 transport).
	 All travels with ½ spindle in cross support (1/3 	
All travels with ½ spindle in cross support (½
travel).
or 2/3 travel).
	 From an end side travel with 2x ½ spindle to
other end.
	 All travels with ½ spindle in side support.
	 Travel fwd. or bwd. with ¼ spindle to side support. 	 Todo, desplazamiento con ½ pívot en apoyo 	 Cross travel fwd. 3/3 with ½ Spindle from one 	 Travel 3/3 over both pommels with ½ Spindle.
lateral.
pommel over the other pommel.
(Nin Reyes)
39.	
40.	
(Nin Reyes 2)
	 3/3 cross support travel fwd. with hop.
(Driggs)
43.	
	 Travel fwd. in cross support (½ or 2/3).
	 Any other travel fwd. in cross support to other
	 Desplazamiento ad. en ap. transversal (½ o 2/3). 	 Travel fwd. in cross support with support on
end (3/3).
	 3/3 cross support travel fwd. in flairs.
(3/3).
(Magyar)
(3/3) (1-2-4-5).
72
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
EG III: Transports inclus Krolls, Tong Fei, Wu Guoniang, Roth et transport avec pivot. - Travel type elements, including Krolls, Tong Fei, Wu Guonian, Roth and Traveling Spindles - Desplazamientos, incluyendo
	 Fr. cr. sup. on end, tr. fwd. in 2 circles to 1st p., to
2nd p., with ¼ turn to side sup. on other end (3/3).
2/3).
chaque arc. et sur l’autre extr. (3/3) (5-4-2-1). 	 Any other travel bwd. in cross support to other
	 Travel bwd. in cross support (½ or 2/3).
	
Travel bwd. in cross sup with support on leather,
end (3/3).
	
Any other travel bwd. in cross support to other
pommel, pommel, leather(3/3) (5-4-2-1).
or pommel to another (⅓).
o 2/3).
	
(5-4-2-1).
st
	 From support on end, kehr fwd. around 1 p., rev.
Stöckli around 2nd p. to side sup., p. betw. hands.
(Belenki)
73
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
EG III: Transports inclus Krolls, Tong Fei, Wu Guoniang, Roth et transport avec pivot. - Travel type elements, including Krolls, Tong Fei, Wu Guonian, Roth and Traveling Spindles - Desplazamientos, incluyendo
	 From sup. on 1 p., Russian wendeswing fwd.
to other end without sup. on or btw. the p. (side 	 From sup. on end, Russian wendeswing fwd. to
to side support, side to cross support, cross to
other end without sup. on or btw. the p. (side to
side support).
side support, side to cross, cross to side, cross
to cross) with full circle after.
	
Any Russian wend. with 360° t. and 3/3 travel.
	 Any 3/3 travel in Russian type wendeswing with
sian wendeswing 360º with travel to the other
720° or more turning.
end in side support.
(Roth)
(Wu Guonian)
87.	
(Tong Fei)
	
Reverse Stöckli from cross support on one end 	 On the leather, from cross support, Russian
wendeswing with 360° or 540º over both pomto the other.
mels.
(Vammen)
74
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Chaguinian to wende.
	 Wende (from circle or flair).
travel 3/3 with 450° or more turn.
(Kolyvanov)
7.	
	 On the end, Russian wendeswing with 360° or 540°. 	 On the end, Russian wend. with 720° or 900°. 	 On the end, Russian wendeswing with 1080º or
more.
13.	
	 DSA with hop bwd. through hdst. on other end.
fw. followed by Schwabenflank a. wende off.
through hdst.
inv.
	 Circle or flair through hdst. (also with ¾ t. with 	 Circle or flair with hop travel bwd. thr. hdst.
or without travel).
23.	
75
Section 12: Rings
Height: 280 cm from the floor.
An exercise on the Rings is composed of swing, strength and hold
parts in approximately equal portions. These parts and combinations
are executed in a hang position, to or through a support position,
or to or through the handstand position, and execution with straight
arms should be predominant. Contemporary gymnastic exercises are
characterized by transitions between elements of swing and strength
or the reverse. The swinging of the cables and the crossing of the
cables are not permitted.
Article 12.2 Content and Construction
Article 12.2.1 Information about Exercise Presentation
1.	From a still stand, the gymnast must jump or be assisted to a still
hang on the Rings with legs together, and with good form. The
evaluation begins with the first movement of the gymnast from the
moment he leaves the floor. The coach is not permitted to give the
gymnast an initial swing.
2.	The gymnast must include only elements that he can perform
with complete safety and a high degree of aesthetic and technical
mastery.
3.	All exercises should contain an approximately equal distribution
of swing, hold and strength elements. Consequently, an exercise
cannot include more than three elements from groups II and/or III
4.	Back swings in support that do not lead to at least a value part but
simply reverse direction and swing back down in or to a lower hang
position are deducted by the E-jury. A typical example of such a
layaway on rings is: from a kip to support, swing back to layaway
to front uprise.
5.	Additional Technical, aesthetic and execution aspects in the exercise construction expectations are:
a)	Hold positions must be reached directly, with straight arms,
and without need for positional or postural corrections.
b)	All hold positions must be held for a minimum of 2 seconds.
c)	Upward swings must lead to or through a handstand, or directly
to a strength hold element whenever the nature of the swing
d)	During all swing to strength hold elements, the shoulders
may not rise above the level of the final hold position. Any
deviation will result in the appropriate deductions by the E-
76
(2 s.).
IV.	Sorties.
jury and, depending on the nature of the element, may lead
to non-recognition by the D-jury.
e)	Swing elements that lead to strength hold elements which must
reverse direction (i.e. front uprise to Swallow; front uprise to
inverted cross and so on…) will be counted as two elements.
f)	 A false grip (over grip) for strength holds is not permitted. A
false grip is performed with the wrists bent in order to gain an
advantage in performing a strength element, deduction -0.1
each time.
	 No false grip: straight wrists with or without the fingers of the
hands wrapped around the Rings.
	 Note: The position of the rings in the hands (with straight wrists
and open hands) does not change the evaluation (no false
grip).
g)	Straight arms must be used whenever the nature of the element permits it.
h)	 Composition errors with deductions of -0,30 points. Example:
	 Honma to support then lift to L sit OR Straddle L sit to L sit
OR Kip to support then L sit, etc.
i)	 Only for strength elements to handstand with bent arms,
where the necessary technique requires minimal touching of
the straps with the lower arms, no deduction should be taken
for contact with the straps (Elements II.25 and II.26).
6.	Yamawaki/Jonasson elements showing a full support or pause
will receive a 0.5 deduction for swing with strength (receiving
non-recognition). These elements with less support shown will
be recognized with small and medium deductions for swing with
strength.
7.	Gymnasts demonstrating very little change in body position after
moving from one hold position to another are subject to execution
deductions and possible non-recognition (i.e: Swallow to support
scale and Hanging scale rearways to Swallow).
8.	For a full list of errors and deductions governing Exercise Presentation, see Section 9 and the summary of deductions in Articles 9.4
and 12.3.
Article 12.2.2 Information about the “D score”
1.	The Element Groups (EG) are:
I.	 Kip and swing elements & swings through or to handstand
(2 sec.).
II. 	 Strength elements and hold elements (2 sec.).
III. 	 Swing to Strength hold elements (2 sec.).
IV. 	Dismounts.
2.	Repeated elements (same Code Identification Number) cannot
contribute to the “D” score. On Rings, this rule is extended so that
not more than 3 elements from groups II and/or III can be presented
in direct succession. The 4th and subsequent Elements from Group
II and/or III of the same sequence will be considered as repetition,
and not recognized by the D jury. However if the gymnast decides
77
to execute more elements from Element Groups II and/or III, in
order to be recognized by the “D” Jury, he must perform at least a
B value swing element from elements Group I (except any kind of
kip/back kip, or element in the same Code box) between the first
sequence of maximum 3, and another element or sequence from
Element Groups II and/or III.
	 This swing element of at least a B value must have to be among
the 10 best or top 5 counting in an element group for recognition.
3.	Special repetitions:
a)	Repeated elements (same Code Identification Number) cannot
contribute to the “D” score. On Rings, this rule is extended so
that a maximum of 1 final strength position in each EG may be
recog­nized for difficulty. Thus, for example only two cross type
elements (regular, L cross, or V cross) or support scale type
elements (regular or straddled) are permitted in an exercise for
difficulty value (one in Group II and one in Group III).
b)	A maximum of 2 Guczoghy and a maximum of 2 Li Ning type
elements can be present in the exercise, the 3rd and subsequent
within either type of element will be considered as repetition.
4.	Additional information and regulations:
a)	All holds must be held for a minimum of 2 seconds. They will
be not recognized by the “D” Jury for Difficulty and/or Elements
Group requirements if no stop position is shown.
b)	Strength presses and lifts which follow a previous hold element
and end in a 2 second hold position are recognized only if the
preceding hold part has been recognized and if a stop position
is shown.
c)	Elements with crossing of the cables are not permitted, being
deducted as composition errors.
d)	For juniors, elements which include saltos backward in hang
and Li Ning type elements are not permitted.
e)	Pineda type elements must be executed with straight body,
straight arms, a momentary hold in the front lever and slowly
to avoid deduction or classification as a swing to strength
element.
f)	 Yamawaki/Jonasson elements showing a full support or pause
will not be recognized for difficulty. A Honma to support and
fwd. swing out to hang will not be recognized as separate
values because of the gymnast’s intent.
g)	All V hold positions (2 sec.) must be performed with legs vertical. This is the same as the requirement for Floor Exercise.
intenta.
h)	An exercise must start in a hang position with arms vertical
and straight. The gymnast may NOT bend their arms in moving to the first position unless specifically needed for element
completion. Example: Cast up and underswing backward may
78
be started with bent arms any time during an exercise.
i)	 During an exercise, a gymnast may only bend their arms during a transition between elements when necessary to properly
perform the next element.
j) For the hold of a non-listed part for 2 seconds or more, deduct
-0.1 each time. Some elements typically featuring this problem
(hold of 2 sec. or more) include: inverted hang, inverted pike,
and dorsal hang.
k)	Nakayama elements must pass through a complete hanging
scale rearways to prevent execution deductions and potential
non-recognition.
l) A dorsal hang to Cross or V Cross is not an acceptable entry
position to elevate the value for either cross (or any other
strength element). If either cross is performed directly from a
dorsal hang, each will retain its independent Code of Points
value (B and C respectively).
m) One Swing to handstand element (2 s. hold) is required in the
exercise and must be inside 10 counting elements.
5.	For a further list of regulations governing non-recognition of elements and other aspects of the “D score”, see Section 7 and the
summary of deductions in Article 7.6.
79
Article 12.3 Specific Deductions for Rings
D Jury
Jury D
Faute
Petite
0.10
0.50
Jury E
Faute
0.30
0.50
More than 2 times element Guczoghy or 2 times element Li Ning.
pas
reconnu.
Supporting or balancing with
feet or legs on cables.
pas
reconnu.
Fall from handstand.
Excessive swing of cables.
Preceding strength hold high
angle- press to strength (also
apply to 2nd element).
Media
0.30
0.50
no-recog
per
element
las anillas
por
no-recog
0.50
Media
0.30
0.10
Bent arms during swing to
strength hold parts or to establish hold position.
Touching cables or straps with
arms, feet or other parts of body
per
element
Compositional errors.
strength holds (each time).
Large
0.50
Legs apart or other poor execution during jump or lift to Rings.
Medium
0.30
Hold of a non-listed part for 2 s.
or more.
suspension.
Error
Crossing cables during any
element.
0.10
Layaway on the back swing.
and non-recognition by the D-jury
Small
0.10
Coach gives gymnast an initial
swing.
Large
0.50
Pre-swing before start of
Medium
0.30
E Jury
Petite
0.10
Small
0.10
Error
No swing to handstand.
0.30
por
80
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Uprise fwd. to support.
	 From a hang or support, back toss to hang rw.
to uprise fwd. to support.
(Li Ning)
	 Swing bwd in support, fall to bwd swing in hang. 	 #1 and counter salto fwd. to bwd swing in hang.
(also from Li Ning).
(Chechi)
	 From hang, underswing w. shoulders above
rings.
(Nakayama)
(Li Ning 2)
81
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Tucked double felge bwd. to hang.
	 Piked double felge bwd. to hang.
	 From hang, felge upward to support.
	 Swing fwd. with straight arms through hdst.
	 Stretched double felge bwd. to hang.
	 Dislocate bwd. piked or stretched.
	 Felge upward to support with straddled legs
supported above the rings (2 s.).
34.	
	 Uprise bwd. to support.
	 Uprise bwd. or giant swing piked or str. through
handstand.
	 Inlocate piked or stretched.
	 Backward swing to salto fwd. p. to support.
(Honma)
82
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
ment.
	 Slow inlocate from hang.
	 Double salto fwd. tucked to hang.
	 Double salto fwd. piked or stretched to hang.
(Yamawaki)
	 Kip to support.
56.	
	 Back kip to support.
	 Back kip with straight arms to support.
	 Fwd. swing to swing bwd. in hang.
	 Uprise bwd. to straddled L-sit (2 s.).
	 Bwd. swing, salto fwd tuck or piked to support.
83
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 From support or cross, felge bwd. piked or
stretched to support.
	 Back kip or roll bwd str. to handstand (2 s.).
	 Swing fwd. with straight arms to hdst. (2 s.).
	 From support swing bwd. to handstand (2 s.). 	 Honma and swing bwd. to handstand (2 s.).
	 Honma str. and swing bwd. to handstand (2 s.).
	 Uprise bwd. or giant swing to handstand with
straight arms (2 s.).
84
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 L-sit (2 s.) or straddled L-sit (2 s.).
	 V-sit (2 s.).
	 Press from inverted cross to handstand (2 s.).
	 Support scale straddled (2 s.).
	 Support scale at ring height (swallow or maltese 	 Inverted swallow (2 s.).
cross) (2 s.).
	 Hanging scale frontways (front lever) (2 s.).
	 Any cross (2 s.).
	 V cross (2 s.).
19.	
	 V Cross, press to V-sit (2 sec.).
85
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Press to hdst. with bent body and bent arms (2 s).
	
Press to hdst. with str. body a. bent arms or b. 	
Press to hdst. with str. body and str. arms or 	
Press to hdst. with str. body and str. arms from 	
body. a. str. arms, or fr. strad. sup. lever (2 s.).
from sup. lever (2 s.).
swallow (2 s.).
	
- Also straddle legs.
	 Slow roll fwd. piked to support.
	 Slow roll fwd. stretched to support.
yo.
	 Slow roll fwd. stretched with straight arms to 	 Slow roll fwd. stretched with straight arms to
handstand (2 s.).
	 Slow roll bwd. slowly with str. arms and str. body 	 Slow roll fwd. stretched (bent or straight arms) 	 Pull with straight arms and body through mo- 	 Pineda a cristo en V (2 s.)
to L sit (2 s.).
to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
mentary front lever to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
42.	
(Pineda)
43.	
44.	
45.	
	 Pineda through cross to support scale (2 s.).
(Pham)
	 Pull with straight body and arms through moment. front lever to swallow (2 s.).
86
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Azarian to V Cross (2 s.).
dorsale horizontal (2 s.).
	 Vertical pull up with bent arms to hanging scale 	 Vertical pull up with straight arms to hanging 	 Roll bwd. slowly with str. arms and body to cross 	 Azarian a cristo en V (2 s.).
rearways (2 s.).
(Tay)
	 Nakayama to V cross (2 s.).
	 Fr. cross or L-cr., turn fwd. to back lever (2 s.). 	 Vertical pull up with straight arms to L-sit (2 s.). 	 From or through hanging scale rearways, with 	 Nakayama a cristo en V (2 s.).
	 Through hanging scale rearways (no hold restraight arms pull to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
quired) pull with str. body through cross to inv.
swallow (2 s.).
	
(Nakayama)
ou croix angle (2 s.).
	 From hdst., lower horiz. to back lever (2 s.).
	 From sup. or cross, lower slowly with str. arms 	 Vertical pull up with straight arms to cross or
	 Del apoyo invertido bajar horizontal a la suspento hang, and pull with str. arms to cross (2 s.).
ing scale rw. and press to swallow (2 s.) or from
swallow same to planche or planche to planche.
	 From handstand, lower slowly with straight arms
through inverted cross to inverted hang.
	 From swallow, press to support scale (2 s.).
	 De hirondelle elevarse al apoyo fac. horiz. (2 s.). 	 From swallow , lower slowly to handing scale, 	 From hanging scale rw. press to swallow (also
press to swallow (2 s.).
to Support Scale) (2 s.).
87
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 From L-cross, press to inverted cross (2 s.).
(2 s.).
	 From L-sit, press to inverted cross (2 s.).
	 De cristo en ángulo, elevarse a cristo inv. (2 s.). 	 From cross, press with straight body to inverted
cross (2 s.).
	 From swallow, press to inverted cross (2 s.).
renverse (2 s.).
	
From cross or L-cross, press to L-sit (2 s.).
	
87.	
zontal (2 s.).
	 From cross, press to swallow (2 s.).
	 From cross, press to planche without first going 	 De cristo, elevarse a Hirondelle (2 s.).
horizontal (2 s.).
	 From inverted cross lower slowly to inverted 	 From inverted cross lower slowly to inverted
hang and felge bwd. slowly to swallow (2 s.).
hang and felge bwd. slowly to cross (2 s.).
(Jotchev)
88
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
Roll bwd. slowly with str. arms and body to
	
Roll bwd. slowly with str. arms and body to free 	
swallow (2 s.).
	
	
Azarian to inverted Swallow (2 s.).
horizontal (2 sec.).
	
From hang vertical pull up with straight arms 	
	
Slowly roll fwd. str. w. str. arms through Cross
to swallow or to support scale (2 s.).
and press to planche without first going to sup- 	
port (2 s.).
	
	
Slow roll fwd. with str. body and arms to Cross
or L-Cross (2 s.), also from inverted hang.
	
	 Through hang rearways press with straight arms
and straight body to inverted cross (2 s.).
(Carmona)
	
Slow roll fwd. with straight body and arms 	
From hang vertical pull up with straight arms to
through cross to inverted cross (2 s.).
	
89
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Uprise fwd. to L-sit, (2 s.).
	 Uprise fwd. to V-sit (2 s.).
	 Kip to L-sit (2 s.).
	 Kip to V-sit (2 s.).
	 Backward swing to salto fwd. p. to L-sit (2 s.).
(Honma)
6. 	
	 Salto fwd. betw. rings direc. to cross / L-cross (2 s.). 	 Salto fwd. between rings directly to V cross (2 s.).
en V (2 s.).
(Tanaka)
(2 s.).
	 Bwd. swing, salto fwd p. to cross or L- cross (2 s.).
90
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Uprise fwd. to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
angle (2 s.).
	 Uprise bwd. to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
38.	
	 Li Ning or Li Ning 2 to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
en V (2 s.).
	 Li Ning or Li Ning 2 to V Cross (2 s.).
42.	
	 Kip to V cross (2 s.).
	 Felge upward to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
	 Felge upward to sup. scale at ring height (2 s.). 	 Domin. ad. a hirondelle inv. sin fase de apoyo (2 s.).
(Rodrigues)
91
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Kip to cross, or L-cross (2 s.).
	 Kip to inverted swallow (2 s.).
en V (2 s.).
	 Back Uprise to V Cross (2 s.).
	 Back kip to cross or L-cross (2 s.).
	 Felge upward to support scale straddled (2 s.). 	 Felge upward to support scale (2 s.).
zontal (2 s.).
	 Uprise bwd. to support scale straddled (2 s.). 	 Uprise bwd. to support scale (2 s.).
	 Back kip to support scale at ring height (2 s.).
92
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Back kip to support scale straddled (2 s.).
tal (2 s.).
	 Felge bwd. stretched to free sup. scale (2 s.).
(2 s.).
	 Felge upward with straight arms to invert. cross
(2 s.).
	 Uprise bwd. to inverted cross (2 s.).
93
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	
	
94
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Salto fwd. piked or stretched.
	 Salto fwd. piked or stretched with ½ t.
	 Salto fwd. piked or stretched with 1/1 or 3/2 t. 	 Salto fwd. piked or stretched with 2/1 t.
	 Double salto fwd. tucked or tucked with ½ t.
	 Double salto fwd. tucked with 3/2 t (also 1/1 t.).
	 Double salto fwd. piked or piked with ½ t.
	 Double salto fwd. piked with 3/2 t. (also 1/1 t.).
	 Uprise bwd. and salto bwd t.
	 Uprise bwd. and salto bwd p. or str.
1/1 t.
1/1 g.
95
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Salto bwd. piked or stretched.
	 Salto bwd. stretched with ½ or 1/1 t.
	 Salto bwd. stretched with 2/1 t. or 3/2 t.
28.	
	 Salto bwd. stretched with 3/1 t.
	 Double salto bwd. tucked or piked.
	 Double salto bwd. stretched.
	 Triple salto bwd. tucked.
G
	 Double salto bwd. t. with ½ or 1/1 t.
	 Doble mortal at. agr. con ½ o 1/1 g.
	 Double salto bwd. t. with 3/2 t.
	 Double salto bwd. t. with 2/1 t.
	 Double salto bwd. t. with 5/2 t.
	 Salto bwd. str. with 1/1 t. and salto t.
	 Double salto bwd. stretched with ½ or 1/1 t.
	
Double salto bwd. stretched with 3/2 or 2/1 t.
	
96
Section 13: Saut
Section 13: Vault
Height: 135 cm measured from the floor
Article 13.1 Description of a Vault Exercise
The gymnast must perform one vault except in Qualification for Vault
Finals and in Vault Finals where he must show two vaults from different Vault Groups and with different 2nd flight phases (for higher
difficulty vaults). For example: different direction - fwd./bwd and/or
different position - tucked/piked (for simple saltos) or minimum ½ turn
difference (for twisting saltos and simple flights). Each vault begins
with a run and a takeoff from both feet (with or without a round off) to
the vault board with legs together and is executed with a brief support
phase on the table with two hands. The vault may contain single or
multiple turns around the two axes of the body. After the first vault,
the gymnast returns without delay to the starting position and, at the
signal of the D1 Judge, performs his second vault.
Article 13.2 Content and construction
Article 13.2.1 Information about Exercise Presentation
1.	The gymnast must begin vault from a still stand with legs together
at a maximum distance or 25 meters, measured from the front edge
of the table to the inner side of the block attached at the end of the
vault run up mat. The vault begins with the first step or hop of the
gymnast, but the evaluation begins the moment his feet contact
the vaulting board. The length of the approach must be marked
on or alongside the approach lane.
2.	The vault ends with a landing behind the table in a standing position with legs together facing either towards or away from the table
(frontways or rearways).
3.	The gymnast must show only vaults that he can perform with
complete safety and with a high degree of aesthetic and technical
mastery. He is required to show the Identification Number of his
intended vault before he vaults.
4.	The gymnast may take-off only forwards or backwards and with
legs together. The only element that may be performed before the
vaulting board is a round off. For such vaults, the use of the vaulting board safety “collar” is mandatory and must be provided by
the competition organizer. For round-off entry vaults, the gymnast
may use one official handy-mat provided only by the organizer.
5.	Vaults with saltos during the first flight phase and vaults with
straddled legs are neither listed nor permitted.
6.	The gymnast must show the intended body position (tucked, piked,
or stretched) in a distinct and unmistakable manner. Indistinct body
positions are deducted by the E-Jury and may result in recognition
97
mains.
as a lower value vault by the D-Jury.
7.	Basis for the Evaluation by the E-Jury:
a)	First flight phase, up to the support with two hands.
b)	2nd flight phase, including the pushing off from the table up
to the landing in a standing position. The gymnast must demonstrate a distinct rise in the height of his body after push off
from the table.
c)	Body position in the momentary support on the table.
d)	Deductions with regard to the deviation from the extended axis
of the table.
e)	Technical execution during the entire vault.
f)	 The landing.
8.	Landing Rules:
a)	The gymnast must land with both feet within an area marked
left and right of the extended centre line of the table as described in the following draw.
aparato.
	
	
	 These lines must be clearly marked on the landing mat. Stepping on the line, but not over the line, is permitted.
	 The mat containing the marked landing zone for alignment
must be securely fastened so that it cannot shift during competition.
b)	Twisting during vaults must be completed before landing.
Incomplete twists result in the appropriate deduction, and if
incomplete by 90° or more, will result in non-recognition by
the D-jury and in recognition as a vault with a lower Difficulty
Value.
9.	In the 2nd flight phase, the gymnast must show a conspicuous rise
in height of his center of gravity at the moment of hand push-off.
10. Salto vaults tucked or piked must display a distinct opening phase
in preparation for landing. A landing that is not prepared is a sign of
an error in technique and will usually result in a technical execution
deduction as well as a landing deduction.
11. For a full list of errors and deductions governing Exercise Presentation see, Section 9 and the summary of deductions in Articles
9.4 and 13.3.
Article 13.2.2 Information about the D score
1.	The gymnast must show one vault in Qualification, Team Final
and the All-Around Final. In the Qualification for Vault Final and in
Vault Finals he must show two vaults, which must be from different
98
Groupe I	
Groupe II	
Groupe III	
Groupe V	
Vault Groups (for all vaults) and which may not have the same or
similar 2nd flight phases (for the higher difficulty vaults).
Group I	
Group II	
Group III	
Group IV	
Group V	
Handspring .
1/4 or 1/2 tw in 1st flight.
Round off entry.
Round off with 1/2 tw in 1st flight.
Scherbo entry in 1st flight
2.	Each vault is listed, numbered, and given a value in the Difficulty
Tables within its Group. The following general principles apply:
Palomas.
a)	Cuervo vaults have the same value as equivalent Handspring
Salto vaults with twists.
b)	Kasamatsu vaults have the same value as the equivalent
c)	Yurchenko vaults have the same value as the analogous
d)	Unless otherwise indicated, round-off entry vaults with ½ turn
to the table have a value of 0.20 more than the analogous
e)	Unless otherwise indicated, round-off entry vaults with ¾ or 1/1
turn to the table have a value of 0.60 more than the analogous
3.	Each vault is given a unique Difficulty Value based on its complexity.
4.	Prior to the execution of each vault, the appropriate vault number,
as assigned in the Code of Points must be displayed for the D-jury.
This function is performed by the gymnast, or an assistant, with
the aid of a flashboard and is not penalized in the case of error.
Example: #319 - The #3 designates the vault group; the
#19 designates the vault number within that vault group.
5.	The gymnast must show the intended body position (tucked, piked,
or stretched) in a distinct and unmistakable manner. Non-distinct
body positions may result in non-recognition by the D-Jury or
recognition as a vault with a lower Difficulty Value. (see the body
position definitions in Appendix A Section 3). The gymnast must
display the vault number for the vault that he can do, not the one
he hopes to do. This warning applies especially for the recognition
of stretched and piked positions.
6.	The placement mat may be used for roundoff entry vaults only,
and is optional.
7.	The vault is invalid (0.00 point from the D-Jury and the E-Jury)) when:
a)	The vault is executed without a support phase, i.e., neither
hand touches the table.
b)	Failure to use the safety collar for round-off entry vaults.
c)	The vault is so poorly executed that the intended vault cannot
be recognized, or the gymnast pushes from the table with his/
her feet.
d)	Spotting assistance during the vault.
e)	The gymnast does not land with his feet first. This means that
at least one foot must contact the landing mat before any other
part of the body.
99
f)	 The gymnast lands intentionally in a side stand.
g)	The gymnast performs a prohibited vault (straddled legs, salto
in first flight, prohibited pre-element before the vaulting board,
etc.).
h) The first vault is repeated for the second vault in Qualification
for Vault Final or in Vault Final.
A video review by D- panel and Apparatus supervisor will automatically occur for every vault receiving an Invalid “0 “Score.
All E-Jury judges enter their deductions after every vault performed. The D jury will notify them in the case of a “0” vault and
advise them of the method to present a “0” E-score.
7.	In Qualification, Team Final, and All-Around Final:
	 • One vault must be performed.
	 • In Qualification, the 1st vault score counts toward the Team and/
	 For Qualification and in the Apparatus Final, each gymnast must
perform two different vaults which must be from different Vault Groups
(for pages 1 & 2 of Vault Value Table) and which may not have the same
or similar 2nd flight phases (for page 2 of the Vault Value Table only).
	 In Qualification and in the Apparatus Final, the average score
of the 2 vaults will determine the final score for the gymnast.
8.	Additional run approaches are permitted as follows, with deduction
of 1.00 for empty run (if gymnasts has not touched the springboard
or apparatus).
-	 When 1 vault is required, a second run approach is permitted
with deduction. Third approach not permitted.
total individual.
saltos).
forma:
-	 When 2 vaults are required, a third run approach is permitted
with deduction. Fourth approach not permitted.
100
Jury D
Faute
Petite
0.10
0.30
0.50
Article 13.3 Table of Specific Errors and Deductions for Vault
D jury
Small
0.10
Error
Landing or touching with one foot
or one hand outside the landing
area.
Landing directly outside the landing
area.
Exceeding 25 meter run for Vault.
Illegal or invalid vaults.
Failure to use vault board safety
collar for round-off entry vaults.
Large
0.50
0,50 from the Final Score
Score of 0,00 for the vault
Score of 0,00 for the vault
or in Vault-Final.
Score of 0,00 for the vault
Repeating 1st vault group in Qualification or in Vault-Final.
2,0 point deduction for the 2nd vault
2,0 point deduction for the 2nd vault
0.30
0.50
salto
salto
E Jury deductions
Petite
0.10
en finale.
Faute
0.50
0.3 from the final score
Media
0.30
0.3 from the final score
Same or similar 2nd flight phase
for the two vaults in Qualification or
in Vault-Final (Table page 2).
0.10
0.1 from the final score
Touching with feet, hands, foot and
hand or with any other part of the
body outside of the landing area.
Medium
0.30
Small
0.10
Medium
0.30
Large
0.50
rise of the body.
Lack of extension in preparation
for landing.
Error
Execution errors in 1st flight.
Technical errors in 1st flight.
Passing the handstand position not
through the vertical.
Execution errors in 2nd flight.
Technical errors in 2nd flight.
0.10
Media
0.30
0.50
fase.
fase.
101
2017 - 2020
EG2
EG1
EG3
Handspring
Palomas
EG5
EG4
Round off entry
Scherbo entry in 1st flight
Round off w/ ½ tw in 1st flight
101
Handspring.
Paloma.
1,6
220
1,6
335
Round off back handspring
1,6
450
Round off ½ tw handspring
1,8
560
Scherbo entry to back handspring
2,2
102
1,8
221
Handspring sideways 3/4 tw
1,8
336
Round off back handspring ½ tw
1,8
451
Round off ½ tw handspring ½ tw
2,0
561
Scherbo entry to back handspring ½ tw
2,4
103
Handspring 1/1 tw.
2,0
222
Handspring sideways 5/4 tw
2,0
337
Round off back handspring 1/1 tw
2,0
452
Round off ½ tw handspring 1/1 tw
2,2
562
Scherbo entry to back handspring 1/1 tw
2,6
104
Handspring 3/2 tw.
2,2
223
2,4
338
Round off back handspring salto bwd tucked (Yurchenko)
2,2
453
Round off ½ tw handspring salto forward tucked.
2,6
563
Scherbo entry to salto backward tucked
2,8
105
Handspring 2/1 tw.
2,4
224
2,8
339
Yurchenko con ½ g.
2,4
454
Round off ½ tw handspring salto forward tucked ½ tw
3,0
564
Scherbo entry & to salto backward piked
3,0
106
2,6
225
2,2
340
Yurchenko con 1/1 g.
2,8
455
Round off ½ tw handspring salto forward piked.
3,0
565
Scherbo entry & to salto backward tucked ½ tw
3,0
107
Handspring salto forward tucked.
2,4
226
2,4
341
Yurchenko con 3/2 g.
3,2
456
Round off ½ tw handspring salto fwd piked ½ tw (Nemov)
3,4
566
Scherbo entry & salto backward tucked 1/1 tw
3,4
108
Handspring salto forward tucked ½ tw. (Cuervo tucked)
2,8
227
2,4
342
Yurchenko con 2/1 g.
4,0
567
Scherbo entry & to salto backward tucked 3/2 tw
3,8
109
Handspring salto fwd tucked 1/1 tw. (Cuervo tucked ½ tw)
3,2
228
2,8
343
2,4
110
Handspring salto fwd t. 3/2 tw (Kroll) or Cuervo t 1/1 tw.
4,0
229
3,2
111
Handspring salto fwd t. 2/1 tw (Canbas) (Cuervo t 3/2 tw)
4,4
230
4,0
112
Handspring salto forward piked
2,8
113
Handspring salto forward piked ½ tw (Cuervo piked)
3,2
114
Handspring salto fwd. piked 1/1 tw. (Cuervo piked ½ tw)
3,6
115
Handspring salto fwd. piked 3/2 tw. (Cuervo piked 1/1 tw.)
4,0
116
Handspring w 1/1 tw to salto forward tucked (Behrend)
4,0
117
Handspring w 1/1 tw to salto forward piked (Rehm)
4,4
118
Handspring w. 1/1 tw. to salto fwd. piked ½ tw. (Arican)
4,8
102
2017 - 2020
EG2
EG1
270
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
EG3
Handspring
Palomas
2 3
Handspring salto fwd. str. ½ tw. (Cuervo str.)
2 3
Handspring salto fwd. str. 1/1 tw. (Cuervo str ½ tw.)
2 3
3,6
4,0
4,4
Hdst. salto fwd. str. 3/2 tw. (Cuervo str 1/1 tw.) (Lou Yun)
Handspring salto fwd. str. 2/1 tw. (Cuervo str 3/2 tw).
2 3
Handspring salto fwd. str. 5/2 tw. (Yeo 2)
2 3
3
Handspring double salto fwd. tucked (Roche)
1
4,8
5,2
5,6
Roche con ½ g. (Dragulescu)
6,0
271
272
273
274
275
276
277
3,2
1 3
3,6
4,0
1
3
1
3
4,4
Kasamatsu str. 1/1 tw. or Tsukahara str. 2/1 tw. (Akopian)
1
3
1
3
370
1
4,8
5,2
5,6
371
372
373
374
375
376
EG5
EG4
Round off entry
Scherbo entry in 1st flight
Round off w/ ½ tw in 1st flight
1
1
3,2
3,6
1
1
1
1
Yurchenko str. 3/1 tw. (Shirai - Kim Hee Hoon)
Yurchenko ext. con 3/1 g. (Shirai - Kim Hee Hoon)
1
4,0
4,4
4,8
5,2
5,6
471
472
473
474
475
Round off ½ tw handspring salto fwd str.
3,8
570
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. stretched (Scherbo)
1
3,8
571
4,2
1
Scherbo 1/1 tw.
1
1
Scherbo 2/1 tw.
1
1
2 3
Round off ½ tw. handspring salto fwd. str. ½ tw. (Hutcheon)
2 3
4,2
Round off ½ tw. handspring salto fwd. str. 1/1 tw.
4,6
2 3
Round off ½ tw. handspring salto fwd. str. 3/2 tw.
2 3
Round off ½ tw. handspring salto fwd. str, 2/1 tw.
2 3
5,0
5,4
476
Round off ½ tw. hdst. salto fwd. str 5/2 tw (Li Xiao Peng)
2 3
5,8
478
Round off ½ tw. hdst. double salto fwd. tucked
5,4
572
573
574
575
4,6
5,0
5,4
6,0
3
5,2
1
5,6
285
286
287
Tsukahara with salto bwd tucked (Yeo)
1
Tsukahara with salto bwd. piked (Lu Yu Fu)
1
5,2
5,6
385
386
Yurchenko and salto bwd. tucked (Melissanidis)
1
Yurchenko and salto bwd. piked (Melissanidis piked)
Yurchenko mortal at. carpa (Melissanidis carpa)
1
6,0
190
Handspring salto fwd. ½ tw to salto bwd. (Zimmerman)
5,6
191
5,6
192
6,0
This page also shows vaults with same or similar 2nd flight phase, denoted with the same last two digits in the vault number and
Key number in the table boxes. The vaults with a potential deduction of -2.0 for qualification to and in the apparatus final are
located in the same row of this table.
5,2
5,6
KEY
CLAVE
Same 2nd Flight Phase
1
Same 2nd Flight Phase
2
Similar 2nd Flight Phase
3
Gymnasts may not do vaults with the same or similar 2nd
flight phase.
o similar
103
5,8
	
Forward handspring.
	
Paloma.
	
Forward handspring with ½ t.
	
	
Forward handspring with 1/1 t.
	
1.6
1.8
2.0
	
Handspring fwd. and salto fwd. t.
	
	 Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. t. w. ½ t. (or Cuervo t.).
gr. a. 1/1 t.).
gr. a. 3/2 t.).
	
Handspring fwd. and salto fwd. piked.
	 Paloma mortal ad. agr. con ½ (o. Cuervo agr.). 	 Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. t. w. 1/1 t. (Cuervo t. 	 Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. t. w. 3/2 t. (Cuervo 	 Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. t. w. 2/1 t. (or Cuervo 	
t. w. 1/1 t.).
t. w. 3/2 t.).
2.4
2.8
3.2
	
Forward handspring with 3/2 t.
	
2.2
4.0
2.4
	 Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. p. w. ½ t. (Cuervo p.).
	 Hdspr. fwd. w. 1/1 t. a. salto fwd. t.
	 Paloma mortal en carpa con ½ g. (Cuervo carp.). 	 Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. p. w. 1/1 t. (Cuervo 	 Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. p. w. 3/2 t. (Cuervo 	 Paloma con 1/1 g. agrupado mortal ad. agr.
p. w. 1/1 t.).
3.2
119.	
3.6
120.	
4.0
121.	
4.0
122.	
	
Forward handspring with 2/1 t.
	
4.4
	
Forward handspring with 5/2 t.
	
2.6
2.8
	 Hdspr. fwd. w. 1/1 t. and salto fwd. p.
	
Hdspr. fwd. 1/1 t. and Salto fwd piked ½ t.
(Rehm)
(Arican)
4.4
123.	
4.8
124.	
104
	 Handspring fwd. and salto fwd. str.
	 Handspring fwd. and salto fwd. str. w. 5/2 t.
	
Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. str. w. ½ t. (Cuervo 	 Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. str. w. 1/1 t. (Cuervo 	 Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. str. w. 3/2 t. (Cuervo 	 Hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. str. w. 2/1 t. (Cuervo 	 Paloma mortal ad. ext. con 5/2 g.
str.).
str. w. 1/1 t.).
str. 3/2 t.).
(Yeo 2)
	
(Lou Yun)
3.6
4.0
	 Handspring fwd. and salto fwd. str. w. 3/1 t.
	 Handspring fwd. and dbl. salto fwd. t.
	 Roche with ½ turn.
	 Roche con ½ giro.
4.4
4.8
182.	
(Dragulescu)
5.2
	
Handspring fwd. and salto fwd. t. w. ½ t. and 	
Handspring fwd. and dbl. salto fwd. piked.
	
salto bwd. t.
	
	
	
184.	
5.6
5.6
181.	
6.0
183.	
5,2
180.	
5.6
5.6
6.0
105
	
Handspring sw. with ¼ t.
	
	
Handspring sw. with 3/4 t.
	
	
Handspring sw. with 5/4 t.
	
	
Hdspr. sw. with. ¼ t. a. salto fwd. t.
	
	
1.6
2.4
232.	
238.	
1.8
	 Tsukahara t. with ½ t.
2.4
233.	
2.0
2.4
2.8
	 Tsukahara t. with 2/1 t.
1/1 g.
2.8
234.	
240.	
3.2
4.0
2.2
235.	
236.	
106
	
	
3.2
	
Tsukahara str. with ½ t. or Hdspr. sw ¼ t. salto 	
fwd str.
	
	
3.6
4.0
	
Kasamatsu str. with 2/1 t.
	
	
Kasamatsu str. with 5/2 t. or Tsukahara st. with
7/2 t.
	
ext. con t/2 g.
5.6
6.0
	
Kasamatsu str. w. 1/1 t. or Tsukahara str. w. 2/1 t. 	
Kasamatsu str. with 3/2 t.
	
Kasamatsu str. with ½ t. or Tsukahara str. w. 3/2 t. 	
	
(Akopian)
(Driggs)
4.8
4.4
	
Tsukahara with salto bwd. t.
	
	 Tsukahara with salto bwd. piked.
	
Double Tsukahara with 1/1 twist.
	
(Yeo)
288.	
5.2
5.2
(Lu Yu Fu)
5.6
6.0
107
	
Round off, handspring bwd.
	
	
Round off, handspring bwd. with ½ turn.
	
Round off, handspring bwd. with 1/1 turn.
	
Round off, hdspr. bwd. and salto bwd. t.
	
Yurchenko t. with ½ t.
	
	
	
	
Yurchenko t. with 1/1 t.
	
1.6
	
Yurchenko t. with 3/2 t.
	
3.2
1.8
	
Yurchenko t. with 2/1 t.
	
4.0
2.0
	
	
2.4
2.2
2.4
2.8
345.	
347.	
350.	
351.	
108
	
	
	
Yurchenko stretched with ½ t.
	
	
Yurchenko stretched with 1/1 t.
	
	
Yurchenko stretched with 3/2 t.
	
	
Yurchenko stretched with 2/1 t.
	
	
Yurchenko stretched with 5/2 t.
	
3.6
3.2
	
	
4.0
4.8
4.4
5.2
377.	
378.	
379.	
380.	
385.	Yurchenko et salto arr. gr.
	
Yurchenko and salto bwd. t.
	
	
Melissanidis piked.
	
387.	
(Shirai - KIM Hee Hoon)
5.6
382.	
(Melissanidis)
5.2
388.	
5.6
109
	
Round off, ½ t. and handspring fwd.
	
	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. with ½ t.
	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. with 1/1 t.
	
	
1.8
2.0
	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd.
p. with ½ t.
	
2.2
	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. 	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. 	
Round off, ½ t. a. hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. p.
tucked.
tucked with ½ t.
	
	
	
2.6
459.	
3.0
3.0
467
(Nemov)
3.4
462.	
463.	
465.	
468.	
469.	
470.	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd.
	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. 	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. 	
str. with 1/1 t.
str.
str. with ½ t.
3.8
4.2
(Hutcheon)
4.6
110
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. 	
	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd. 	
Round off, ½ t. and hdspr. fwd. and salto fwd.
stretched with 2/1 t.
stretched with 3/2 t.
str. with 5/2 t.
	
	
Round off, ½ t. a. hdspr. fwd. and double salto
fwd. tucked.
	
5.0
5.4
5.8
5.4
480.	
486.	
487.	
492.	
493.	
495.	
496.	
111
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. tucked.
	
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. tucked with ½ turn.
	
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. piked.
	
Scherbo entry to back handspring.
	
Scherbo entry to back handspring with ½ 	
Scherbo entry to back handspring with 1/1 	
	
	
	
turn.	
turn.
	
2.2
2.4
2.6
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. tucked with 3/2
	
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. tucked with 1/1 	
turn.
turn.
	
3.4
	
Scherbo with 1/1 t.
	
4.6
578.	
3.8
	
Scherbo with 3/2 t.
	
5.0
579.	
	
Scherbo with 2/1 t.
	
5.4
580.	
2.8
3.0
3.0
	
Scherbo with ½ t.
	
	
Scherbo entry to salto bwd. stretched.
	
(Scherbo)
	
Scherbo with 5/2 t.
	
3.8
4.2
582.	
5.8
4.0
112
Section 14: Parallel Bars
Height: 180 cm from top of mat, 200 cm from floor.
A contemporary parallel bar exercise consists predominantly of swing
and flight elements selected from all available Element Groups and
performed with continuous transitions through various hang and
support positions in such a way as to reflect the full potential of the
apparatus.
Article 14.2 Content and Construction
Article 14.2.1 Information about Exercise Presentation
1. The gymnast must initiate his Parallel Bar mount or his run-up
from a still stand with legs together. The exercise begins the moment the feet leave the ground. Swinging with one leg or stepping
into the mount is not permitted. The feet must leave the ground
simultaneously.
2.	A vaulting board placed at the height of the regulation landing mats
is permitted for the mount.
3.	Pre-elements are not permitted. This means that any element that
rotates more than 180º around any body axis may not be performed
prior to grasping the rail or rails with the hands.
4. The gymnast must include only elements that he can perform
with complete safety and a high degree of aesthetic and technical mastery.
5. Additional execution and exercise construction expectations are:
a)	Back swings in support or upper arm hang that do not lead to at
least a value part but simply reverse direction and swing back
down in or to a lower hang or support position are deducted,
i.e:
•	 Back swing in upper arm hang, layaway to glide kip.
•	 Back swing in support, layaway to front uprise.
•	 Back swing in support, layaway to hang.
•	 Glide kip to upper arm hang or to momentary support and
lay back to upper arm hang.
•	 From handstand, lower to shoulder roll forward.
b)	No extra support is allowed during elements with turns on
one arm support. Elements such as giant swing with turn,
backward uprise with turn, forward uprise with full turn, Felge
113
horizontal.
IV.	Sorties.
elements with turn, etc. will be considered finished where the
c)	All elements in hang followed by kips must be executed with
d)	The following elements or groups of elements are not permitted:
•	 Strength and hold elements that are not listed in the difficulty tables.
•	 Saltos and dismounts from side hang on one bar.
•	 Saltos with reception in upper arms and/or bent arms
support for juniors.
e)	Elements performed to one bar (Chiarlo, Piasecky, etc..) must
be executed to a handstand with hands slightly apart. A slight
deviation of the shoulders/body is permitted because of the
unnatural hand position. Deductions will be taken for excessive
hand separation and/or body deviation.
f)	 On all Moy and Giant Bwd. swings, legs may not bend until
body is horizontal.
g)	The deduction for lack of extension before regrasping after
saltos means the extension (opening) should be at horizontal
(bar height).
6. For a full list of errors and deductions governing Exercise Presentation, see Section 8 and the summary of deductions in Article 14.3.
Article 14.2.2 Information about the “D score”
1.	The Element Groups (EG) are:
I.	 Elements in support or through support on 2 bars.
II. 	Elements starting in upper arm position.
III. 	Long swings in hang on 1 or 2 bars and underswings.
IV. 	Dismounts.
2. Information on difficulty value:
a)	For elements which include turns, the turns are not recognized
as part of the element if the turn happens after the handstand
position or after a hop to handstand. Examples: basket with
inlocation and hop to handstand with turn or giant swing half
turn with hop to handstand followed by turns.
b)	Unless otherwise indicated, elements that deliberately re-grasp
in bent arm support are considered to have the same identification number and value as elements which re-grasp in upper
arm support. However, elements that are initiated from bent
arm support are considered to have the same identification
number and value as elements from or through support.
c)	Unless otherwise indicated in the difficulty tables, elements
performed from or to unusual or rotated grip positions (supinated or pronated) have the same identification number and
value as analogous elements performed from or to the usual
grip position.
114
d)	Elements formed by combined independent elements must
demonstrate no pause between elements, or they will receive
their independent values.
e)	In the Qualifications or Team Finals, for preparation of the
Parallel Bars prior to an exercise (during the one-touch warmup and competition), any FOP accredited person from the
federation of the gymnasts may assist. In the All-Around or
Apparatus Finals, a maximum of three people (the competing
gymnast, coach, and 1 other FOP accredited person may be
on the podium to prepare the bars.
3.	Additional information and regulations:
a)	Many swinging elements lead to or are defined to a handstand
on one or two rails. The handstands from swing need not be
held but the element must be performed in a manner that
convincingly demonstrates that the handstand position could
have been held if so desired.
b)	Special rule: Elements to one bar in cross support have the
same value as done to two bars, except they increase by one
value more when connected to Healy type elements (each
Healy element also increases by one value)- hold is allowed
in the one bar handstand.
c)	 Elements to one bar upgrade the value if is connected to healy
type elements, but only if the healy element is executed without
d)	No straddle element to one bar can receive an increase in
e)	How to evaluate Makuts type elements with a pause or stop
during the first part of the element:
Performance
Jury D
Jury E
Performance
D-jury
E-jury
of element
Give value
-0.1 for Pausing or
Stopping in Handstand
One second hold
after first part of
element (less than 2
seconds)
Give value
-0.3 for Pausing or
Stopping in Handstand
Two second hold
after first part of
element
No value
-0.5 for Pausing or
Stopping in Handstand
	 For example: Makuts to handstand with less than a one second
hold after the ¾ Diamidov and then ¾ Healy = E value and
-0.1 for Pausing or Stopping in handstand.
f)	 All Healys must have 360° or more turns to be recognized as
a Healy type element.
	 i.e. From a swing element (minimum B value) to handstand
on one bar sideways, requires a Healy (450° turn) to support
115
	Exemples:
for an E value.
	 Note: A ¾ Healy, from sideways position, is a B value and
same box as Element I.44.
4.	Special repetitions:
a)	Elements with saltos: an exercise can not include more than
one variation of the same element (within the same EG). In
this case the element with the highest difficulty value will be
counted for difficulty.
- 	Morisue tuck or Morisue pike.
- 	5/4 Salto fwd straddled to up. arm hang or to bent arm
support or through support to hang/directly to hang.
b)	Maximum two Giant Swings to handstand (III. 21, 22, 28, 29
& 35).
c)	 Maximum two Basket Swings to handstand (III. 106, 107, 114,
119, 120, 130,136).
5. For a further list of regulations governing non-recognition of elements and other aspects of the D score, see Section 9 and the
summary of deductions in Articles 9.4 and 14.3.
dificultad.
	Ejemplos:
35).
120, 130,136).
Article 14.3 Specific Deductions for Parallel Bars
	
Faute
Petite
0.10
Not controlled momentary
handstand positions on 1
or 2 rails.
(50’’).
excessive hand separation
Lack of extension at
saltos.
Medium
0.30
Media
0.30
control.
0.30 from the Final Score (D1 Judge) for
individual competition or 1.00 from team
score for team competition.
0.10
each time
subir.
Uncontrolled regrasping
Non respect of the official
warm up time (50’’).
Large
0.50
Pre-element.
Stepping or hands adjustments in handstand.
Small
0.10
Layaway on the back swing.
Error
One leg step or swing on
mount.
0.50
0.30
0.50
116
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Any handstand on 1 or 2 rails (2 s.).
barres).
	 Bent arm swing fwd. to hop ½ t. to sup.
	 Any L-sit on 1 or 2 rails (2 s.).
	 Swing fwd. w. 1/1 t. to up. arm hang.
	 Straddle cut bwd. to hdst.
	 Diamidov and ½ turn to upper arms.
	 Straddle cut fwd. to support or L-sit (2 s.).
	 Straddle cut bwd. to support.
	 Stützkehr fwd. or salto bwd. to hdst. sideways on
1 rail (also with additional ¼ or ¾ turn to hdst.).
(Dimic)
	 ¾ Diamidov and rear vault to side hang on 1 bar.
	 Diamidov with ¼ or ½ t. to hdst.
	 Strad. cut bwd. and salto fwd. to up. arm hang. 	 Swing fwd. w. 1/1 t. on 1 arm to hdst.
117
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	
¾ Diamidov & ¾ Healy on the other hand to supp.
	
Any press w. bent arm str. body, or str. arm bent 	
Makuts to upper arm hang or ¾ Diamidov ¼ 	 Swing forward with 5/4 t. on one arm through- 	
Swing forward with 5/4 t. on one arm through
body to hdst., on 1 or 2 rails (2 s.) also straddled.
Healy to support.
hdst. and healy to up. arm.
hdst. and healy to support.
	
	
apoyo.
	 Swing fwd. to hdst., hop to support.
	 Salto bwd to handstand. Also to one rail.
banda.
39.	
	 Salto bwd to handstand 1 rail (connected to
Healy type element).
(Rumbutis)
44.	
	 Salto bwd. with ½ t. to up. arm hang.
	 Double salto t. to up. arm hang.
(Morisue)
	 Double salto p. to up. arm hang.
118
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Hdst. with ¼ t. and fall back to sup. with ¼ t.
	 Hdst. with ¾ t. and fall back to sup. with ¼ t.
	 3/2 salto bwd. with ½ t. to up. arm hang.
53.	
54.	
56
	 Stützkehr bwd. with straddle cut bwd. to sup.
	
	
	
Stützkehr bwd. through hdst. to support.
	
	 Healy to upper arm hang.
	 From hdst. on 1 rail, Healy to upper arm hang. 	 Healy to support (also from hdst. on 1 rail).
Following a swing element (min. B) to hdst on
1 rail, Healy (360° or more) to support.
(Healy)
	
Min.
B
119
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	
	
Swing bwd. with ½ t. hop to hdst.
	
	
Swing bwd. with ¾ t. hop to hdst.
Swing bwd. with 1/1 t. hop to hdst.
	
Gatson 1 with ¼ t to hdst. on 1 rail and ¼ t.
	
hdst. on 2 rails.
	
(Gatson 1)
(Gatson 2)
81.	
2 s.).
	
Any 1/1 pirouette in hdst. on 2 rails.
	
	 Any hdst. with ½ turn fwd. (also with 2 s.).
	 ½ turn bwd. in handstand (also with 2 s.).
hdst.
	 From hdst., salto fwd to support or from hdsd.
with rotated grip, inlocate to support.
	 5/4 salto fwd. strad. through support to hang or
directly to hang.
120
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
97.	
	
5/4 salto fwd. t. or p. to upper arm hang.
	
Salto fwd to support.
5/4 salto fwd. straddled to up. arm hang.

Double salto fwd. t. to up. arm hang.
	
Double salto fwd. p. to up. arm hang.
	
Salto fwd. t. or p. with ¼ t. to hang on 1 rail. 	
Salto fwd. t. or p. to hang at the end of the bars. 	

109.	
110.	
	
5/4 salto forward str. to upper arm hang
	
	
On end, 1 circle or flair.
	
In center or on end facing out, 1 circle or flair. 	
	
	
5/4 salto fwd. strad. to bent arm sup.
	
	
Salto fwd. with 1/1 t. to up. arm hang.
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
Any flair to hdst.
Any flair with ½ t. to hdst.

122
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Forward uprise to support.
	 Fwd. uprise and straddle cut bwd to handstand.
	 Fwd. uprise with ¼ t. to hang on 1 rail.
	 Roll bwd. with ½ t. from up. arm. hang or Fwd.
uprise to Kato hop to sup.
al exterior.
4.	
	 Fwd. uprise with ½ t. to handstand.
	 Fwd. uprise to Makuts to support.
	 Fwd. uprise to Makuts to upper arm.
(Tsolakidis 1)
G
	 Roll bwd to handstand with straight arms.
	 Fwd. uprise with 3/2 t. to handstand.
	 Fwd. uprise with 1/1 t. to handstand.
(Tsolakidis 2)
	 Roll bwd. with strad. cut to support.
	 Salto bwd. with strad. cut to up. arm hang.
	 Roll bwd with salto bwd tuck to upper arm hang. 	 Roll bwd with salto bwd piked to upper arm hang.
(Dimitrenko)
(Li Xiaopeng)
123
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
26.	
	 Bwd. uprise to handstand (or w. ½ t).
	
Bwd. uprise with ½ t. hop to handstand.
	
Bwd. uprise with ¾ t. hop to hdst. on 1 rail.
	
Bwd. uprise with ½ t. and straddle cut bwd to 	
Bwd. uprise with ½ t. a. strad. cut bwd. to sup.
	
	
43.	
	 Bwd. uprise with ½ t. to support.
27.	
	 Roll bwd. with ½ t. tuck to upper arm hang.
	 Roll bwd. with ½ t. tuck to hang.
quial.
(Dalton)
	 Bwd. uprise and salto fwd. p. to sup.
Bwd. uprise and double salto fwd. t. to up arm
up.arm hang.
hang.
(Yamawaki)
124
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
51.	
52.	
	 Bwd. uprise and 5/4 salto fwd. straddled to up.
arm hang.
	 Bwd. uprise and strad. cut or flank over to sup. 	 Bwd. uprise and strad. cut or flank over to sup.
str. arm.

125
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Swing forward, straddle cut backward, and
regrasp with straight body at horizontal.
	 Swing forward, straddle cut backward, and regrasp 	 Moy piked with straddle bwd to hdst.
	 Moy piked with 1/1 t. to up. arm hang.
	 Moy piked with stradd. cut bwd. and ½ t. to up. 
arm hang (also legs together).
(Nolet)
	 Moy and salto fwd. t., p. or strad. to upper arm
hang.
	 Moy to support bent legs (also without grip 	 Moy to support str. legs (also without grip
release).
release).
(Moy)
	 Giant swing bwd. to hdst. or with inlocation fwd. 	 Giant swing bwd. to hdst. on one rail (connected to
(also with ¼ or ½ turn and to one rail).	
Healy type element).
(Wells)
126
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
pension.
	 Giant swing bwd. with ½ t. to up. arm hang.
	 Giant swing bwd. with ½ t. to support.
	 Swing down with salto bwd. str. to hang.
	 Giant swg. Diamidov with ¼ or ½ t. to hdst.
	 Giant swg. bwd. with Diamidov to hdst., also to 
one rail.
	 Giant swg. bwd. with Diamidov to hdst. one rail 
(connected to Healy type element).
(Quintero)
G
38.	
39.	
	 Giant swing bwd. with Makuts to upper hang.
	 Giant swing bwd. w. strad. cut to up. arm hang.
	 Giant swing bwd. with straddle cut to support or 	
Giant swing bwd. with ½ t. and str. cut bwd. to
up. arms.
(Sosa)
127
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8

	 Fr. giant. sw. bwd., dbl. salto t. to up. arm hang. 

(Belle)

	 Giant swing bwd. and salto with ½ t to hang on 	 Giant swing bwd. and salto with ½ t or p. to up. 	
Giant swing bwd. and salto with ½ t or p. to 	 Giant swing bwd. with ½ t. and 3/2 salto fwd to up
the end.
arm hang or hang.
support.
arm hang.
(Chartrand)
(Torres)
(Tanaka)
	 Glide kip one or two rails.
	 Glide kip. with 1/2 t. to support.
	 Glide kip bwd. to hdst.
	 Glide kip to strad. cut bwd. hdst. on 1 or 2 r.
	
Giant swing bwd. and salto with ½ str to up.
arm hang.
(Fokin)
70.	
128
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Glide kip through L-sit p. to hdst.
	 Glide kip one rail through L-sit strad. to hdst. 	 Glide kip through L-sit p.to hdst. and hop with
3/4 t or more.
salto.
78.	
	 Glide kip through V-sit and hop ½ turn to hang
on other rail.
(Li Donghua)

129
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	
Cast to upper arm hang.
	
	
Cast to support.
	
	
Felge with ½ t. to upper arm hang.
	
Felge with ½ t. to rear support.
	
	
Cast with ½ t. to up. arm hang.
	
Cast with ½ t. to support.
	
	
Basket to handstand or with inlocation (el-grip) 	
Basket with ¼, ¾ or ½ t. to handstand.
and hop to hdst. Also to one rail.
	
	
	
Basket with 1/1 t. to handstand.
	
(Teng Hai Bin)
110.	
	
Cast to straddle cut backward to handstand.
	
(Arican)
	
Basket with 5/4 t. to handstand.
	
(Zhou Shixiong)
G
	
Basket to support
	
Basket with travel to hang
	
	
	
Basket with immed. straddle cut to support.
	
Basket to one rail hdst. (connected to Healy 	
Basket through handstand to Makuts.
	
	
(Yamamuro)
G
130
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	
Basket forward to support.
	
	
Basket forward with ½ t. to support.
	
124.	
	
Basket with salto bwd t. to up. arm hang.
	
	
Shoot up to hdst. and hop to other rail.
	
	
Shoot up with ¼ t. to hdst.
	
	
Straddled shoot to hdst on 1 rail.
	
140
131
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Salto fwd. piked or stretched.
	 Salto fwd. piked or str. with ½ t.
	 Salto fwd. piked or str. with 1/1 or 3/2 t.
	 Salto fwd. piked or str. with 2/1 or 5/2 t.
	 Double salto fwd. t.
3/2 g.
5/2 g.
	 Double salto fwd. piked.

	 Double salto fwd. t. from end.
11.	
12.Double salto fwd. t. w. ½ t. or ½ t. doub. salt. bwd.
13.	
14.	
15.	
	 Double salto fwd. piked with ½ t.
16.	
G
	 Salto bwd. piked or str.
	 Salto bwd. piked or str. with ½ t.
	 Salto bwd. piked or str. with 1/1 or 3/2 t.
	 Salto bwd. str. with 2/1 t.
	 Double salto fwd. tucked with 1/1 t.
G
132
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
26.	
27.	
31

	 Double salto bwd. t.
	 Double salto bwd. t. from end.
	 High wende and salto bwd t.or p.
30.	
	 Double salto bwd. pike.
	 Double salto bwd. t. with 1/1 t.
G
37.	
	 Double salto bwd. t. with ½ t. or salto bwd. ½ t.
	 From hang on end, salto bwd. stretched.
	 From hang on end, double salto bwd. t.
	 From hang on end, dbl. salto bwd. piked.
	 From hang on end, dbl. salto bwd. t. with 1/1 or
	 From hang on end, dbl. salto bwd. t. with 2/1 t.
133
Section 15: Horizontal Bar
Height: 260 cm from top of mat, 280 cm from the floor.
A contemporary Horizontal Bar Exercise must be a dynamic
presentation that consists entirely of the fluid connection of swinging,
turning, and flight elements alternating between elements performed
near to and far from the bar in a variety of hand grips so as to
demonstrate the full potential of the apparatus.
Article 15.2 Content and Construction
Article 15.2.1 Information about Exercise Presentation
1.	The gymnast must jump or be assisted to a still or swinging hang
on the Horizontal Bar from a still stand with legs together or from a
short run, but always with good form. The evaluation begins from
the moment the gymnast leaves the floor.
2.	The gymnast must include only elements that he can perform
with complete safety and a high degree of aesthetic and technical
mastery.
3.	Other execution and exercise construction expectations are:
a)	The exercise must consist entirely of swings without stops or pauses.
b)	Deviations in swings to or through handstand, including turns.
=	
- 0.1
- 0.3
=	
- 0.1
- 0.3
- 0.5 and non-recognition (by the D jury)
	
=	
- 0.1
- 0.3
	
134
Turning Elements finishing in mixed elgrip and double elgrip are
subject to the following deductions:
= 	 - 0.5 and non-recognition (by the D jury)

and non - recognition
c)	Flight elements must demonstrate a conspicuous rise of the
body during the flight phase.
d)	Backward swings to handstand that simply reverse direction
and swing back down in the reverse direction are deducted
(composition errors) each time with 0,30 points.
	 Specific examples of such layaways are:
•	 Following a kip cast or back uprise to handstand - layaway
to giant swing bwd., Stalder, free hip, ½ turn to el-grip, etc.
•	Following a backward uprise to handstand and hop to
overgrip - swing forward to giant swing bwd., Stalder, free
(Also other angle deductions also need to be applied for
missing the handstand position).
e)	Any flight element with salto over the bar requires a giant swing
afterward or -0.3 (E-jury deduction).
f) For all Adler elements it is not required to enter from a handstand position.
4.	For a full list of errors and deductions governing Exercise Presentation, see Section 9 and the summary of deductions in Articles 9.4
and 15.3.
etc.
Article 15.2.2 Information about the D score
1.	The Element Groups are (EG):
I.	 Long hang swings with and without turns.
III. 	In bar and Adler elements.
IV. 	Dismounts.
135

=
0,10
=
0,20
mains.
2.	Information about Connections (CV).
Connection points can be awarded only in the following situations:
Flight
Connection
points
Flight
C value
C or higher
D or higher value
D or higher value
=
0,10
=
0,20
Does not have to be inside the counting elements.
3.	Additional information and regulations:
a)	Unless otherwise indicated, the value and identification numbers of elements listed in the Difficulty Tables are the same if
performed from handstand, from a back swing, or from some
other position.
b)	Unless otherwise indicated, elements have the same difficulty
value and identification number when performed with the
“wrong grip” or atypical grip positions.
c)	Elements that end in a double elgrip have one letter superior
value than the same elements ending in one arm elgrip.
d)	Unless listed in the Difficulty Tables, elements with or from feet
on the bar are not permitted (exception: Piatti elements).
e)	Starting or re-grasping flight elements with one hand (or “wrong
grip”) has the same value and identification number as starting
or re-grasping with two hands.
f)	 Elements with turns must show the turns as an integral part
of the element being performed and the turn must be initiated
on the way up (exception Endo type elements).
g)	Elements with hops to handstand, which include turns, must
initiate the turn during the hop and must re-grasp with the
second hand only after the turn has been completed. A regrasp may occur initially with one hand and then the second
hand as the turn is completed. A hop element is considered
finished at the moment that both hands re-grasp the bar.
h)	El-grip elements meet only the requirements for the Element
Group in which they are listed.
I.	 Flight elements from el-grip are considered to belong to
Element Group II.
II.	 Dismounts from el-grip are considered to belong to Element Group IV.
III.	Endo swings in el-grip are considered to belong to Element Group III.
i)	 Expectation for Rybalko:
•	 Prerequisite condition for Rybalko is both hands in el-grip
in end position.
o viceversa
=
0,10
=
0,20
136
Exemples:
•	 Visible hop and fluid turn, not the turn on supporting arm.
j)	 Turning elements in one hand support position must be considered as finished at the moment the gymnast re-grasps the
bar with the second hand.
k)	Unless otherwise indicated, an element composed of two
separate elements will result in divided values when a grip
change occurs. (i.e. Endo in overgrip, change one hand to
undergrip, and 1/1 turn to el-grip = B+C).
la barra.
4.	Unless otherwise indicated, for elements of Group I and III, the
following principles are used for the determination of difficulty:
a)	Value of the base element has been given a certain value.
•	A ½ turn does not increase the difficulty.
•	A 1/1 turn increases the difficulty by one letter.
•	A1/1 turn or greater to both el-grip increases the difficulty
by two letters.
•	A hop does not increase the difficulty.
•	Re-grasp in double el-grip increases the difficulty by one
letter.
b)	The element has the same value and identification number
whether it crosses the bar or not, as long as the amplitude
stipulations have been met.
5.	Flight elements from el-grip and dismounts from el-grip or dorsal
hang have the same value as elements performed in regular grip.
dificultad.
normal.
Ejemplos:
6.	Special repetitions:
a)	A maximum of two Stoop Circle Rearward forward through
handstand elements (Adler type) are permitted. In this case
the elements with the highest difficulty value will be counted.
b)	Elements with turns: an exercise cannot include more than
one grip variation of the same element. The second executed
one in chronological order is considered as repetition.
Examples:
•	 If a Rybalko in double el grip is executed, another Rybalko
in mixed grip or one hand grip is not permitted.
•	 If an Endo with 1/1 turn in mixed grip is executed, another
Endo with 1/1 turn in double el grip is not permitted.
•	 If a Stalder ½ turn in double el grip is executed, another
Stalder ½ turn in mixed grip is not permitted.
7.	Regrasping Tkatchev ½ or Yamawaki ½ elements without sufficient
turning and continuing to handstand (or directly connecting to a
release element) will receive the value for the identical element
listed in the code of points without a ½.
8.	For an el-grip or Russian giant to be recognized directly after an
Adler or turn to el-grip, the el-grip or Russian giant requires a swing
over the bar in el-grip in order to receive a value.
9.	A Zou Li Min executed with insufficient turning (greater than 90°
deviation on first full twist) will not be recognized by the D-jury
and receive a -0.5 deduction by the E-jury. This element may not
be devalued to a Giant Swing Fwd. with one arm in undergrip (B
value).
137
grand tour dorsal avant (grand tour russe, Élément IV.15) doivent
en prise cubitale.
11. The Yamawaki element must be stretched when passing through
a vertical body position over the bar for no deductions. An excessive pike or a poor vertical position over the bar will be deducted
and could also lead to recognition of a B value flight element.
12. Yamawaki ½ will need to have all turning continue in the same
direction for the increase in letter value. If the element turns in two
different directions, the element will not be recognized by the D
jury. This element has the same twisting specification as all other
elements in the Code of Points.
13. Flight elements always receive value when two hands regrasp
the bar and a distinct hang phase is shown before the gymnast
falls. If the catch is performed with one arm, the value is given to
the gymnast when two hands have finally regrasped the bar or
another element has been clearly initiated.
14. A Rybalko to one arm with additional ½ or 1/1 turn. Numerous
variations of these elements have been proposed. The MTC will
not permit any additional turning in order to raise the value of
any Code of Points listed elements performed on one arm for the
safety of all gymnasts.
15. Giant swing bwd. with hop 3/2 t. to one arm giant swing (Rybalko
to one arm giant swing) is the same value and box as Rybalko to
undergrip or mixed el-grip (Element I.63).
	 Note: This rule also applies to all Stalder Rybalko type elements.
16. One arm giant swing fwd. w. 1/1 t. to el-grip and 1/1 t. to ugr. (Zou
Li Min, Element I.27) cannot be combined with any other element
for an increase in value.
17. Endo in el-grip thr. hdst. (Element IV.39): As long as the hands are
in el-grip during the entry of the legs, a hop out to undergrip, mixed
grip, or overgrip afterward is permitted without a loss of value.
18. How to determine evaluate el-grip combinations:
	 An El-grip giant swing (Element IV.14) and Giant swing rearways
fwd. (Russian giant, Element IV.15) only require going over the top
of the bar in el-grip to receive their listed value. No specific amount
of a giant swing in el-grip is required in order for the element to be
recognized.
	 Sequence examples:
1. Adler to 50° from handstand, swing in-elgrip through the bottom
and over the top, swing in elgrip through the bottom and hop
out to undergrip= No value for Adler (and -0.5 angle deduction)
and B value el-grip giant.
138
2. Adler to handstand, swing in el-grip through the bottom and over
the top into el-grip Endo, swing through the bottom in el-grip
Endo, and hop out to undergrip = C value Adler, B value el-grip
19. Flights elements with ½ turns to mixed el-grip must have more
than 50% of the turn completed upon catching the bar in order to
receive no deduction while continuing to back uprise to handstand.
E-jury deductions of small, medium, large should be applied for
any insufficient turning upon catching the bar.
20. Stoop circle fwd. to straddle cut to hang or sup. (Element II.1)Gymnast may enter at any angle from a giant swing or swing
forward.
21. For a further list of regulations governing non-recognition of elements and other aspects of the “D score”, see Section 7 and the
summary of deductions in Article 7.6.
139
Jury D
Faute
Petite
0.10
0.30
Article 15.3 Specific Deductions for Horizontal Bar
Jury D
0.50
Error
Small
0.10
Medium
0.30
Large
0.50
0.10
Media
0.30
0.50
Passing through lower vertical
more than 2 times with one arm
and non-recognition by the D-jury
More than 2 times Stoop circle
rearward forward (Adler)
and non-recognition by the D-jury
(Adler)
Jury E
Faute
E Jury
Petite
0.10
suspension
0.30
0.50
Error
Small
0.10
Legs apart or other poor
to Horizontal Bar
Medium
0.30
Lack of swing or pause in
handstand or elsewhere
Low amplitude on flight
elements
Deviation from plane of
movement
position
0.10

Bent arms on regrasping
following flight elements

actions

each time

each time

Elements not continuing in
their intended direction (applied after element) Needed
to show the element can
receive value
Any flight element with salto
over the bar without a giant
swing afterward
0.50
Media
0.30
Illegal elements with or from
feet on the bar
Layaway on the back swing
Large
0.50
140
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Back uprise to handstand.
	 Back uprise to hdst. with 1/1 turn also to mixt.
	 Giant swing fwd. with 1/1 turn in double elgrip.	
	
Flying giant swing fwd. with 1/1 t.
	
	 Back uprise to handstand with ½ turn.
	 Swing bwd. and pirouette to hang.
	 Swing bwd. and pirouette to support.
13.	 Grand tour avant.
	
Giant swing fwd.
	
	
Giant swing fwd. with 1/1 turn in mixt grip.
	
	
Giant swing fwd. with ½ t. thr. hdst.
	
Flying giant swing fwd. or with½ turn.
	
141
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	
Giant swing fwd. with one arm in ungr. (360°).
	
On one arm, giant swing fwd. w. 1/1 t. to el-grip
and 1/1 t. to ugr.
	
	 Giant swing bwd.
	 One arm giant swing bwd. (360°).
36
	
Giant swing bwd. with ½ turn.
	
	
Giant swing bwd. with hop to undergrip.
	
	
Flying giant swing bwd.
	
	
Flying giant swing bwd. with 1/1 t.
	
	
Flying giant swing bwd. with 2/1 t.
	
142
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	
Giant swing bwd. with hop ½ t. to el-grip.
	
Giant swing bwd. with hop 3/2 t. to double el- grip.
	
Giant swing bwd. with hop 3/2 t. to undergrip, 	
mixed el-grip.
(Rybalko)
	
	 Giant swing bwd. with ½ t. to el-grip.
57.	
	 Long swing fwd. with hop to el-grip.
63.	
64.	
	
El-grip giant swing.
	
69.	 Grand tour dorsal avant (grand tour russe).
	
Giant swing rearways fwd. (Russian giant).
	
	
Giant swing rw. bwd. (Czech giant swing).
	
143
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Elgrip giant swg. with 1/1 t. thr. hdst. in mx. gr.
	
Steineman uprise w. ½ t. to support.
Giant swing rw. bwd. (Czech giant swing) with
	
Giant swing bwd. with inlocation during swing 	
½ turn to fwd giant swing.
and dislocate to hdst.
	
	
a molino.
80.	
81.	
86.	
87.	
88.	
144
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Markelov stretched with legs together.
	 Back uprise and straddle over to hang rw.
	 Back uprise and strad. hecht with ½ t. to hang. 
(Markelov)
(Yamawaki)
	 Swing fwd. and vault bwd. strad. or piked to hang. 	 Tkatchev stretched.
(Tkatchev)
15.	
	 Tkatchev stretched with 1/1 t.
	 Tkatchev stretched with ½ t. to mix el-grip into 
back uprise to hdst.
(Liukin)
	 Tkatchev straddled with ½ t. to mix el-grip into 	
Tkatchev straddled ½ t. to double elgrip.
back uprise to hdst.
	
(Lynch)
	 Back uprise and piked vault with ½ t. to hang.
	 Back uprise and hecht stretched with 3/2 t. to
hang.
(Walstrom)
	 Stalder, stoop circle or free hip circle bwd to	
18.	
	 Piatti stretched with ½ t. to mix el-grip into back
uprise to hdst.
145
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Back uprise and rear vault with ¼ t. to hang.
		Piatti stretched with 1/1 turn.
	
Piatti with ½ t. to mix el-grip into back up. to hdst.
	
G
	 Salto fwd. stretched, also from el-grip.
also from el-grip.
	 Salto fwd. stretched with 1/1 t. also from el grip.
41.	
	 Salto fwd. stretched with 2/1 t. also from el grip.
39.	
40.	
G
45.	
	
Swing fwd. and counter salto fwd. strad. to hg.
Yamawaki ½ t. stretched to mixed grip into back
	
uprise to hdst.
146
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	 Salto fwd, tuck or strad. over the bar, also from el-grip.
(Gaylord)
	
Czech giant and vault bwd. strad. to hang.
	
59.	 Gaylord carpe.
	
Gaylord piked.
	
54.	Gaylord with ½ t.
	 Gaylord with ½ t.
(Pegan)
	
	
G
suspension.
	 Swing fwd. and salto bwd. strad. w. ½ t. to hg.
	 Kovacs stretched or piked with 1/1 turn.
(Cassina)
G
(Pineda - piked)
	 Swing fwd. and salto bwd. piked w. ½ t. to hang.
susp.
	 Swing fwd. and salto bwd. w. 3/2 t. to hang.
(Deff)
147
A = 0,1
B = 0,2
C = 0,3
D = 0,4
E = 0,5
F = 0,6 G = 0,7 H = 0,8
	
	Stalder ½ t. to rear vault with ¼ t. to hang.
	
Salto bwd. ½ t.tucked over the bar.

(Jansen)
78. 	
	 Salto bwd. ½ t.piked over the bar.
(Gaylord 2)
	
Double salto bwd. t. over the bar.
	
Kovacs piked or stretched.
	
	
Kovacs with 2/1 t.
	
H
	 Kovacs with 1/1 t.

	 Kovacs with 3/2 t. to mix grip.
(Shaham)
G

	 Kip to hdst. or from mixed grip to hdst w. ½ t. 	 Kip to hdst. in under or mixed grip w. 1/1 t. to 	 Kip to hdst. in under or mixed grip w. 1/1 t. to
mixed grip.
el-grip.

	 Weiler with 1/1 turn to mixed - grip.
mains.
	 From hdst., free hip circle fwd. thr. hdst.
	 Weiler with 1/1 turn to double el - grip.

	 Weiler with ½ turn.
	
From hang or from support, free hip circle 	 Weiler con ½ giro
through handstand.

From hang or from support, free hip circle 	
From hang or from support, free hip circlethrough handstand with ½ turn.
through handstand with ½ turn to el grip.

	 From hang or from support, free hip circle hop
to handstand.
	 From hang or from support, free hip circle hop
	 through handstand with 1/1 turn.
	 Free circle fwd. straddled or legs together thr. hdst.

(Endo)

	 Endo with ½ t. thr. hdst.
	 Stalder with hop 1/1 t. through hdst.
prise cub.
	 Free circle bwd. straddle or legs together thr.	 Stalder with hop 3/2 turn through hdst. in mix 	 Stalder with hop 3/2 turn through hdst. in el-grip.
hdst.
el-grip.

	 Endo with 1/1 t. thr. hdst. in el-grip.
	 Endo. with 1/1 t. thr. hdst. in mixt grip.


	 Stalder with ½ turn through hdst.
cub.
	 Stalder with ½ turn through hdst. in el-grip.

	 Stalder with hop through hdst.
	 Stalder with hop through hdst. in el-grip.
cubital.
59. 	
	
Stoop circle rearward fwd. through hdst.
(Adler).
	
Adler and 1/1 t. through hdst. in ungr.
	
Adler with ½ t. through hdst. in ovgr.

	 Adler hop to hdst. in ungr. or ovgr. or mixed grip.

Adler and 1/1 t. thr. hdst. in mixed grip, also
with hop.
	
	 Back toss to dorsal hang.
	 Stoop in and free back toss to dorsal hang.

Endo in el-grip and 1/1 t. to mixed grip or undergrip.
	
	 Steineman uprise w. stoop or to hdst.
	
Endo in el-grip thr. hdst.
	
Steineman uprise w. flank bwd. to sup. or hang. 	
	
Koste ½ turn to elgrip.
	
(Likhovitskiy)
	
Stoop circle fwd. to straddle cut with ½ t.
	
Carballo with ½ turn to mixed el-grip.
	
	
Stoop circle fwd. to straddle cut to hang or sup. 	
Stoop circle fwd. to straddle cut through hdst. 	
	
	
(Quintero)

Code MAG 2
	 Salto fwd. piked or stretched, also with ½ t.
	 Salto fwd. str. with 1/1 or 3/2 t.
	 Salto fwd. str. with 2/1 or 5/2 t.

	 Triple salto fwd. t.
(Rumbutis)
G

tour.
	
Double salto fwd. t. or p. with 1/1 or 3/2 t.
	
Double salto fwd. t. or p. with 2/1 or 5/2 t.
	 Double salto fwd. t. or p.or with ½ turn.
	

	 Double salto fwd. t. or p. or with ½ turn over 	 Dbl. salto fwd. t. or p. w. 1/1 or 3/2 t. over the bar.
the bar.
	
Double salto fwd. str. or with ½ t.
	
	
Double salto fwd. str. with 1/1 or 3/2 t.
	

	 Salto bwd. piked or str. also with ½ or 1/1 t.
	 Salto bwd. str. with 3/2 or 2/1 t.
	
Salto bwd. str. with 5/2 or 3/1 t.

Double salto bwd. tuck or pike.
	
	
Double salto bwd. t. or pike with 1/1 t.
	 Double salto bwd. t. or p. with 2/1 t.
	

	
Double salto bwd. str.
	
	
Double salto bwd. str. with 3/1 t.
	
	
Double salto bwd. str. with 1/1 t.

Double salto bwd. str. with 2/1 t.

	 Triple salto bwd. t. or over the bar.
(Hoffmann)

	
Double salto bwd. t. or p. over the bar.
	
Dbl. salto bwd. t. or p. with 1/1 t. over the bar. 	
Double salto bwd. t. or p. with 2/1 t. over the bar

	
Triple salto bwd. p.
	
(Fardan)

	 Double salto bwd. str over the bar.
la barre.
	 Double salto bwd. str. w. 1/1 t. over the bar.
	 Triple salto bwd. t. with 1/1 t.
(Belle)
G

PART IV
PART
IV
Appendix A
Additional Explanations & Interpretations
1.	The text in the difficulty tables supersedes the illustrations.
2.	(See Art. 7.4.m) This rule is interpreted, in part, as follows:
a)	Twisting elements on all six apparatus will not be recognized
if they are performed with a 1/4 twist (90°) short of or beyond
the specifications for the intended element
b)	Swinging elements on all appropriate apparatus will not be
recognized if they are completed 45° or greater from the perfect or the prescribed end position. On the Horizontal Bar this
means, for example, that a free hip circle can be performed
up to 45° past a handstand and still be recognized by the DJury. On the Parallel Bars, for example, a Stützkehre must be
performed to at least 45° above horizontal to be recognized by
the D-Jury. A stretched position is considered piked if at any
time during the element a pike of greater than 45° is shown.
3.	 (See Section 9.1.1) Being performed with perfection implies also
that elements be performed with the specified body position. The
following definitions will apply.
a)	A perfect stretched body position is one in which a line from
the shoulders through the hips to the ankles is straight for
static elements and straight or slightly bent forwards or backwards during dynamic elements. If the hip assumes a flexion
of greater than 45° at any time during the element, it will be
considered piked.
b)	A perfect piked body position is one in which the knees are
straight and the hips are bent at least 90°. Errors include a
pike of less than 90° from the extended position and/or an
additional bending of the knees. If the knees assume a flexion
of greater than 45° at any time during the element, it will be
considered tucked.
c)	A perfect tuck position is one during which the hips are strongly
bent and the bent knees are brought to the chest - a minimum
90° bend in each. Errors include a hip bend of less than 90°
from the extended position and/or a knee bend of less than
d)	A stretched position with a knee flexion of 90° is considered
to be stretched but with a large error. If this occurs during an
element it will not be recognized by the D-jury.
e)	A straddled position must be shown with the maximum separation of the legs that the aesthetic and technical nature of the
element allows.
157
f)	 Each of the salto positions - tucked, piked, stretched, straddled
- is expected to be demonstrated so distinctly and conspicuously as to leave no doubt about the intent.
g)	A regular handstand on all apparatus is one with the body
perfectly aligned and without arch. A wide arm handstand on
Floor Exercise requires the head to be within one hand width
of the floor.
h)	Strength holds on all affected apparatus require, depending
on the element, the arms to be perfectly horizontal, and/or the
body to be perfectly horizontal, and/or the legs to be perfectly
horizontal.
i)	Certain dynamic elements when poorly performed can be
confused with other elements. Some typical examples include:
i.	 Twisting elements on all apparatus that over- or under-turn
by more than 90º.
ii.	 On Pommel Horse; cross support travels which are
oblique by more than 45º versus travels in side support.
iii.	 On Vault; handspring forward with salto (Group I) versus
¼ turn in preflight and ¼ turn off with salto forward (Group
II).
	In all such cases, the gymnast is obligated to demonstrate
the element he wishes to show in a distinct and unmistakable
manner. Failure to do so will always result in a large deduction
from the E-jury and non-recognition by the D-jury (or on Vault,
recognition as the element and Group with the lower value).
j)	 Exceptions can be made if the correct technical execution of
an element requires a modification of these definitions.
4.	 (See Section 9.1.4) This, along with Article 5.2.b is a most important directive for all judges especially with the stated expectation
that all elements be performed to perfect end positions. The judge
must at all times use his gymnastics knowledge and gymnastics
sense. The following examples may be instructive.
a)	It is possible to perform elements such as a Tkatchev to a
handstand on Horizontal Bar but it is not yet a reasonable, nor
perhaps a desirable, expectation. It is reasonable, however,
to expect in all cases that the element be performed with
technique of such excellence that the gymnast has had time
to prepare for the re-grasp, that it occur with straight arms,
and that it permit continuation with a smooth full swing.
b)	It is possible to perform a dislocate to handstand from inverted
hang on Rings, but it would certainly be an exception. The
deduction for not completing this element in handstand would
not apply.
c)	Some elements have a special purpose or effect and if such
purpose is conspicuous and aesthetic it would be exempt from
the usual amplitude requirements.
d)	It is possible to perform a reverse Stützkehre on Parallel Bars
through a handstand but that is essentially a different element
158
	
(it is listed as such in the Difficulty Tables) and should not
become the regular expectation for a reverse Stützkehre.
e)	There exist a small number of elements (bent arm vs. straight
arm press on several apparatus; amplitude on scales on Floor
Exercise; V-sits vs. high V-sits (Manna) on several apparatus;
planche vs. swallow on Rings) where intermediate positions
make recognition for the D-jury and evaluation difficult for
the E-Jury. The gymnast is expected to show his intended
position or performance so distinctly and conspicuously as to
leave no doubt about the intent. Intermediate or non-distinct
positions are always deducted by the E-Jury and may lead to
non-recognition by the D-jury.
5)	Parts of the pommel horse.
	 To assist in the definition of circles and travels in side support or
cross support, the parts of the horse are defined according to the
		

counter-clockwise	
clockwise
		 Elements in Side Support
Elements in Cross Support
